Governors Summit on Career Connected Learning ñ May 31, 2017
Making Career Connected Learning Locally Strong Exercise Results

1.	What CCL projects do you want to share?

Youth summer internship program- partnership with Grays Harbor Youth Works and Arc of Grays harbor to provide youth with disabilities career preparation. Summer internship opportunity with stipend. (Corinne Daffern: 360-570-4249
The entrepreneurial Institute of Washington developed an online platform that delivers content around construction education, technology and entrepreneurship. This platform and our audience range from 6th ñ post secondary (Dan@eiwashington.org youtube: eiw contractor university)
Summer jobs in a variety of industries (perhaps at a training wage) to help our kids learn worker traits needed to succeed.
Apprenticeship opportunities in construction trades. (Leanne Guier, 1206-290-7710)
I am an advocate and activist for strong support for CTE programs in the k-12 system that are available to all ñ Ralph B. Ibarra/ Ralph @MBEWorld.com
Partner with other entities to deliver education.
In my software development classes at Green River College, we invite local businesses and non-profit orgs to be project clients. Students work in teams of four to consult and with their business clients to deliver working software (web & mobile applications) and real business value over the course of six months. It is an intensive career connected learning experience we seek to grow and expand with the help of local and state partners. (Kendrick Hang, khang@greenriver.edu, 253-833-9111 x4310)
Suncadia Culinary Arts Academy partnership with CleElum-Roslyn School District (Lisa Hull, CTE Director hull@cersd.org, 509-649-4945
Ensuring that young people are able to relate what they are being taught to real-world situations. Example word problems in math that directly relate to a specific career interest. More hands on learning and intentional promotion of non- traditional education tracks.
Apprenticeships, internships, on-job training ?These are all things our schools are looking for.
Looking for businesses that are willing to allow kids in! PLEASE SHARE BUSINESS INFOR W/OUR SCHOOLS (Heather Weeks, heather_weeks@sumnersd.org)
Truman learning experiences will be in part driven by career connected learning experiences.
Air traffic, Washington Stems -Inspire and support business.
Partnership with Girls First/ Chamber ?
I have been working with Highline & Pierce Colleges & the workforce board & COEís to build identity online and hybrid courses available to students everywhere but especially in rural areas. This database will hopefully spark increased interest in and support between educators and businesses and learners. (sarahemphill@icloud.com)
Succession planning, high cost of living, people leave Whatcom/Skagit county for family, wage, jobs. Talent pipeline is critical, work based learning opportunities. 
WWU to community, not profit, networking
Options High school: BSD Aerospace manufacturing, culinary, Homeport, boat building, Lynden Door
The Mount Vernon Chamber Foundation sets up job shadows and internships for college students through our ìexperience work project.î
CTE courses/NCTA (Northwest Career technical academy)
Maestro para el pueblo (k-12 ? CTC ? 4 year)
Healthcare pipeline (k-12 ? CTC ? 4 year)
College professional technical programs/training (all hands on) 
Internships	
Cascade Job Corps
Try a trade event for high school (Lynnette.bennett@skagit.edu)
The 4-H program raises young people to be intrinsically driven to succeed in fields of self-chosen interest. Our youth are approximately 22% more likely to pursue post-secondary education or work opportunities (Michael Wallace, mlwallace@wsu.edu)
Cascade job corps college and career academy: health care pathway development, IT pathway development, pilot project (lutton.darrel@jobcorps.org)
Cybercamps ñ middle and high school
Service learning projects
Street law at WCC
VITA via WCCís accounting program
Hospitality and tourism students working nonprofit community events
Ferndale high school students run IT help desk
Cyber Patriot (Trish Newbold, tnewbold@whatcom.edu)
Street law for paralegal studies, LLLT students, attorney gives basic free legal advice, paralegal students assist students in and set with clients. College internships. Campus to campus (HB1986) through Whatcom Community College, Western University and Skagit Valley College (Amy Riedel, ariedel@whatcom.edu)
Street law at Whatcom Community College (students work with lawyers to serve low income populations)
Cybercamps for students (high school) to explore IT careers also help desk on campus and mentoring high school students at Ferndale High schools. VITA assistance with tax prep- college students work with tax specialist to serve low income populations at Whatcom Community College (Janice Walker, Dean for Workforce Education, Whatcom Community College, jwalker@whatcom.edu)
TEALS, Promise Academy Programs
ìEarn and Learnî youth program at WorkSource- soft skills curriculum
Project WA ? Wa inside app *new*
NW Technical and Career Academy
WorkSource partnership with AJAK
Project WA, Northwest Career and Technical Academy, HS 21, Earn and Learn, WDC partnered with AJAC, 4-H Seatech
I have been leading a CCL project called ProjectWA (projectWA.org) which enables students to create their own mobile apps in the classroom. In 2016, Lopez Island students created the Washington State Insider App in their WA History Class. Rewards people for exploring historic places in WA. The result is both educational and a boost for heritage tourism. Since then, other schools have started doing similar projects. 468Fieldtrip.com (Tim Fry, tim@468communications.com, 206-660-4321
Pre-apprenticeship with AJAC and Northwest Workforce Council (NWC) earn and learn: soft skill workshop , learning through NWC for Young adults
Future partnership with ANEW
ProjectWA (mobile App) WA State Insider : Tim Fry (Carla Conforto, Northwest Workforce Council, cconforto@workforcenorthwest.org
Student help desk at Ferndale school district
Child development
RWT (Recruiting Washington Teamers) with Skagit Community College
Pipeline to health career with local health care entities
CTE courses at MVHS (Ryan Beatty, RBeatty@svsd320.org)
Youth engagement and WCD for paid internships
BTCf! Skagit high school, pipelines to teachers and health. Do better job in high school to focus on careers- BI = internships and career fairs, DVR goes into schools to connect ñ IEP! Part likes content training- paid learning experiences have value (btc.edu)
Cyber security program at WCC and WWU
NWCA at SVC IT program for Whatcom/Skagit
Cascades job corps college and career academy ñ Daryl Luddox ñ IT
None we need to be more intentional.
Bellingham Technical College is responsive to local employers by making alterations to programs that prepare students for specific jobs in our community.
Ferndale Chamber of Commerce has a leading ladies group who is interested in finding a way to connect to high school age girls to allow them to talk to our diverse group about career opportunities. We have business owners, astronauts, non-profits, superintendents of schools, politics, etc (Ann Serwole ann@ferndale-chamber.com, 360-384-3042)
STW project/partnership between schools and local employment programs (funded by DVR and county)
Starting early- employment focused by age 14
Career launch with ages 6-18 through boys & girls club
Career fairs and community employers come in to share information with youth.
Job shadow- chamber of commerce- local businesses
Internship matching webpage on kitsapedu.org via KEDSís tech committee
Coderdojo (westsound coder dojo)
Bibiotec program at krl.org
AVID program at Bremerton HS (Kathy Cocus, cocus@kitsapcda.org)
Kitsap Regional Library is offering paid internship opportunities for youth ages 16-25. The internship is designed as a skills building process where interns design a project that helps them connect o their college and career goals while helping to build a stronger STEM learning environment at our library (Seth Ciotti, sciotti@krl.org)
Job corps ñ recruitment and job placement locally.
Youth build- Seattle, Tacoma, Olympia locations.
Both are federally funded pre-apprenticeships programs for 16-24 year old youth.
Youth Apprenticeship and Apprenticeship skill based learning (elmer.arter@LNI.WA.GOV)
Career fairs, including elementary. Engaging business to provide workplace experiences.
I supported several career fairs at high schools. Also setting up next one at Toutle and Castle Rock high school combines. It brings in diverse pools of employers to enlighten kids grade 6-12 to the different opportunities for future employment options which have resulted in great success and wonderful feedback from both employers and students.
Career and networking fair (annually) 
High tech U-STEM focused even 4 days hands on includes technical skills and soft skills
Job shadows and cooperative education available for any student in any program. Career events offered monthly to the community and recorded by local KLTV then aired and available on You Tube
Many more k12 community collaboration events, websites and advisory committee work. (Tamia Bell, 360-442-2621, Int. Dean, Lower Columbia College)
What CCL projects do you want to know more about? Construction trade fairs, LCC STEM Saturdays, Diesel Days, Kids College, learning Laboratories, Teach the Teacher externships (rwestphall@wahksdk12.wa.us)
STEM Saturdays -LCC
Construction trade fairs, have for all local school districts
Self employment opportunities
In school apprenticeship ñ In Wahkiakum county very few if any opportunities for internships
Need more hands on in high school for future graduates
I did not realize how much CCL activities were already in the community.
Inputting job shadowing for senior year over a summer or helping get out high school kids jobs in areas of interest over a summer. Hands on learning. Communicating ìhigher educationî differently. A certificate is higher education but not 4 years, so is an endorsement, CD
1.	Robotics programs starting at Kindergarten
2.	Flexibility in learning for students so more graduate with the idea of what they would like to do job shadowing- internships
3.	Self employment
We (Cowlitz Tribe VR) will be holding a self-employment fair. I would like to work with some of the people here today to work together to hold the event or participate in it. (Shari Parker 360-575-6220)
Lower Columbia regional University Center annual open house, local degrees that are available on the LCC campus or are online with additional support with LCC. We do outreach with students on finding their passion and the pathways it takes to get there. Advising strategies to educate students and community members on it.
Need strong connections between middle and high school students and the diverse talents and mentoring abilities from local retired persons.
Adapt ìrunning startî to involve experiential learning such as apprenticeships and internships.
Construction and trade fair, annually (September) All local area school are invited. Pre-register for 1 or 2 sessions offered. (Mollie.dubois@kelsosd.org, KHS Career Specialists, 360-501-1839)
I am excited that LCC is conducting summer programs for children k-12 to excite them about careers early (Charisse Wimer, 360-849-9401)
SEMI High Tech U ñ partnership with businesses to host student onsite to explore STEM careers
Kids College ? CTE focused summer camps
Diesel Day/trade day ? explore careers in the trades through hands on activities
STEAM workshops ? weekend one-day camp taught by SMEs (Hahli Clark Rogers, hclark@lcc.ctc.edu)
Business back to school
AAUW Great Explorations Conference at Whitman College for girls in the 5-8th grades. Conference held every 2 years; next conference March 9, 2019
Thunderjet Boat Company would to participate inn CCL events like:
ï	Career presentations/career fairs
ï	Internships/job shadowing
ï	We are open to other ideas and opportunities
ï	Erik Bon Fleur, Director of Operations; Thunder Jet/Brunswick Corporation; erik.bonfluer@brunswick.com
Would like to have partnerships between the Clarkston Community Garden and WWCC
Would like to encourage the WWCC library to be a site where students could explore career options
Continue with "covert" education on trades with local HS
Emphasize "hope" as we guarantee good/great jobs for motivated kids
Colville Rotary Career Fair
Colville Fish Hatchery Skills Center
Library programming built around CCL (from Secretary of State and Microsoft)
ï	3-D Printer education demonstrations and coding classes - connecting all ages to basic coding
Colville Fish Hatchery
Great discussion with the Kettle Falls Robotics Team - well-spoken and exciting
Fish hatchery program for students in a variety of schools in the area
Desire by local employees/small businesses to have more skills developed in mechanical/voced/etc
4-H programs - hands on career experience, public speaking, financial/recordkeeping
Davenport ñ CCL projects to share
The Davenport school district is developing a satellite skills center and focusing initially on construction trades and CAN (pre- nursing) (Noelle Carstens: 509-725-1481)
The fish hatchery project in Colville, WA to instruct students on raising trout shows good use of a facility that was no longer in use.
Teacher academy, cross age tutor, welding certificates, mouse and Microsoft certificates, directed study.(Bill Wadlington: wwadlington@columbia206.org, 509-641-1170)
How can SPED students be a part of this process (Effie Dean: 509-796-2511)
Membership development. Brands and career advancement. Soft skills training program. Junior achievement partnerships (John Cuitanick)
Work Force Development center partners with school districts and does a phenomenal job training students in real world manufacturing skills as well as showing each different role that exists at a manufacturing plant. (Carmela Morelli, carmelamorelli@wfdcenter.org)
I take students to training centers, EUCC Advanced Manufacturing programs and encourage exploring career and college programs
STEM capstones, community-based learning and research courses throughout curriculum
Industry/employer round tables with Snohomish County Economic Development and EASC
Internship/mentorship database youthworks finding 
Trade up ñ day event with school district and Snohomish county labor and Snohomish county STEM (Erin Monroe, CEO, workforce Snohomish)
Inspire Her ñ a Snohomish county boys and girls club program ñ free! Dedicated to showcasing career opportunities to 8-18 year old girls. Entry to Apprenticeship programs at Sno-Isle Libraries
Local apprenticeship programs
Work based learning
Internships (williamsd@monroe.wednet.edu)
There are coding clubs being run by companies and churches. Not sure about price but most clubs focused at young kids are much cheaper than those for high school and up. Also video game development needs to be emphasized. The industry has surpassed the firm industry in size and revenue so it has become a pillar of modern society entertainment and a source for future jobs. Not only coding but art, writing, engineering, model, voice workers so many different roles. (jasonycho16@gmail.com)
High school and beyond plan at MSD
Career and college deadlines coordinator at shorewest
HSBP at shorewest (Pat Negaity)
WSU Snohomish county extension 4-H benefits from the work experience of our volunteers. Our experiential in formal learning benefits greatly from the volunteerís life and work experience
More career exposure for students (job shadow, career fairs, internships etc) Help students discover their passions!
More ìreal worldî learning for traditional teacher to bring relevant examples of careers into their teaching and classrooms.
Trade up, previously the construction carnival ìcredentialingî
Renton Construction ñ center of excellence
Sno-Isle skill center model in Snohomish County
See attached education guide
We offer 3 career connected learning opportunities: Boeing career tour (pg6), Aerospace Manufacturing Career Tour (pg6), Aerospace Maker Project 2 college credits (pg7) (Brie Ducarp, Education Director)
Eisenhowerís MS Business Expo
At the college level we imbed interactions with industry and employers. Students spend time on field trips learning and asking questions of people doing the job(s) they are training for. Itís a job shadow short-term. We also invite guest speakers to onsite classes to talk about what jobs are really like! (Laura Baker, Everett Community College)
Identify every studentís unique strengths using the dependable strengths process as researched at the University of Washington and the Center for Dependable strengths. This is the beginning step to good career decision making. Career awareness must start with self awareness. (Allen Boivin-Brown, allenbb@wavecable.com)
A job training program at Hopeworks station for low-income populations in a cafÈ, a retail furniture store, and landscaping. Additionally, we will be launching a whole new set of job training programs in the food service industry in the next few years (foodworks) (Nick Montanari, nickmontanari@hopeworks.org, foodworks KK Kosidowski kristenkosidawski@hopeworks.org)
Career experiences of industry leaders (technology business etc)
Projects for high school students to work on collaboration with various industries (process, manufacturing, engineering, biotech, etc). Robots that are being built in many schools in Edmunds School District (Mark Madison ESD #15 staff/ Peter Harrison Edmonds Resident)
Trade up ñ an exciting introduction into the many career options in trades. The last one was held April 4, 2017 from 9-3:30 pm at the Arlington Municipal Airport for high school students. (Ton Nguyen, youth initiatives Manager, 425-921-3445)
MTHS Internships, WWU, Boeing, Microsoft, Fluke
WABS Teacher externship and WABS Teacher fellowship
The AMTEC program at EVCC is fantastic and we are helping with mechatronics mentorship and internship opportunities. Also providing STEM presentations for the boys and girls club along with company tours. Teaming with Arlington city on a potential makers space which could include high school projects.
Job fairs
Army recruiters are always available for mentorship and leadership development. We are frequently invited to speaking engagements where we teach the community on the various programs and opportunities to enhance careers and school accomplishments
We also offer several STEM exhibitions. (Captain Rockie Ventura 260-769-6493, rockie.d.ventura.mil@mail.com
Internships through school classes/ apprenticeships and prior training
Working with risk management for better opportunities without needless restrictions
Have internships work with graduation requirements.
Enjoyed the discussion with CTE, business organizations and educators on the possibility of increasing pre- apprenticeship/internship opportunities. The concerns remains funding for after school and summer classes, 180 school day calendars.
Lake Stevens Program of Study (gene_wachtel@lkstevens.wednet.edu
AJAC ñ apprenticeship program
Work Force Development Center (David Trader)
ECO car program granite falls high school (Michael Werner, michaelwerner59@gmail.com, 425-750-6402)
For low-income, formerly homeless youth 16-24, we offer training programs in retail and food and beverage. This is 25% classroom training and 75% hands on training. Each trainee is matched with an employment specialist to support them before and after the 14 week program. (Hopeworks Social Enterprises, Nick Montanari, nickmontanari@hopeworks.org
Robotics elective class in the middle school, even for kids who are not interested in tech, it teaches creative problem solving process
Journalism CTE in Mountlake High School that uses top of the line technology to create communication across multiple platforms, print media and beyond.
Northeastern University/Boston Co-op education program needs to be done at WSU, UW etc
Through Guereti Rotary I have presented my career to avid kids at Cascade, Sequoia & Everett High school
Boeing workforce development
The PUDís summer hire program (Jenni Lamarca)
Iím the CCL facilitator and itís unfortunately precious few (Andy Sevald asevald@everettsd.org)
Teaching mentors how to work effectively and compassionately with students.
Lakewood ñ CCL projects to share
Pierce College Career Pathways Projects
Discussed the different center education programs in WFD.
At Evergreen State College having interior conversations about career connected learning, curriculum, student services, and a Liberal Arts and Science education. Wetlands monitoring internship with WA DOT ñ partnership.
Cascades College and Career Academy is a new pilot program through the department of labor. Which offers resident training and college degree options in the healthcare and info. Technology career pathways to low income youth ages 16-21 years. Our program fills up to 3 years of education, skills, and hands on training to prepare youth on a successful and sustainable career.
Highline College has received approval to offer a Bachelor of Applied Science in Teaching and Early Learning. This will be a pathway for para-educators, preschool teachers and childcare providers. The program offers both certification and non-certification options in education with a number for endorsements including early childhood education, special education, ELL and bilingual. Core endorsements will be offered in elementary education and early childhood education.
As a representative for students with disabilities (OSPI program supervisor), my focus is to learn more about program options, as well as how programs can accommodate those individuals ñ and what barriers exist.
Bates Technical College is an initial partner with AJAC in the youth apprenticeship initiative. Our next step in this partnership is to articulate the apprenticeship credits into college level programs, enabling and encouraging students to pursue their 2-year degrees.
Boeing ìcore plusî curriculum and Boeing internship opportunities. Bethel offers teacher summer externships, and we can do more to coordinate those.
CTAPP ñ Construction Trades Academy Pre-apprenticeship Program, one-quarter pre-apprenticeship that is a pathway to either apprenticeship or our construction technology degree program, possible pathway for youth.
I am developing the Community Advanced Academy. It will give individuals a basic yet thorough understanding at the land surveying professions and at computer aided drafting (CAD). A heavy emphasis will be put on soft skills, professional appearance, and the pros and cons at social media. It will also focus on math, public speaking, and letter writing.
At Northwest Career and Technical High School students can earn industry credentials and AAT Degrees (tuition free) and high school diplomas. Students are ready to work.
-Latino open house at Bates Technical College on Thursday, June 22nd, 2017 ñ 4:30pm-7:30pm.
-Shoot for the moon job fair on Thursday, September 21st, 2017.
Math science leadership (MSL) @OUT 3 week summer leadership for 7th-12th graders connecting technology and environmental projects to career exposure as scientists. UW-CIAC is developing W/UW Bothell a cooperative education model.
I think the Wenatchee area is amazing in what they are doing! Incredible.
We had two experiments taking on high school students for apprentices (paid) work. One turned out well even though the student had a questionable academic record. That student over two years was part time of course changed 180 degrees and was able to graduate and go off toward a permanent career. The second student had the brains but not the dedication or support at home so I would not call his term a success. But we were forced by our council to stop taking on ìunderage childrenî. Very unfortunate.
Job fairs ñ we had local employers looking to hire full time. Urging graduating 18 year old seniors, May 24-25, as employees.
At the institute we provide multiple opportunities to engage youth in STEM oriented programs such as tours (high school, middle school, and elementary school ages). We provide high school internships for students on
vocational tracks and college level internships for a broad range of departments.
After school program. Take advantage of after school mentoring or job shadowing opportunities. Make this a priority! 
4-H provides learning skills.
Shop teacher in Lyle is having his class build a tiny house to sell to fund the class and learn the construction business.
How do we motivate participation in CCL? How can we take advantage of initiatives that exist? How can we leverage being in a bi-state region? How can we build an attitude of learning? How can we identify and break down barriers to CCL?
Columbia Gorge Regional collaborative ñ Oregon initiative but includes Klickitat and Skamania counties Gorge Training Initiative ñ South Central Work Force Council Partnership with school districts and Columbia Gorge Community College incorporation with Clark College and YVCC.
What we already have are community members who mentor our young people in a very organic way. People first works with disadvantaged youth have summer work. DVR is tasked with working with younger pre-employment aged students with disabilities to have volunteer or work based experience. In Vancouver they have a skill counter we need one of those in every county. ESD112 should have an 18-21 program but they donít. Iím talking a real 18-21 where they learn life skills and work experience for our vulnerable population. The developmental and mentally disabled students.
Public libraries provide career exploration and skills certification online. Public libraries work on skills/readiness classes for youth (STEM, eg). Libraries offer experiences and exposure to ideas to inspire youth.
Where are the teachers ñ jobs ñ job shadowing ñ will there be jobs. Same level of learning experiences no matter where in the store. Support ñ support ñ support.
At FVRL (Fort Vancouver Regional Library) we offer open volunteer opportunities for youth of all ages. The volunteers help with small projects and more in depth projects. We have also hosted job shadowing and Mentored teens in senior projects. We also host Teen Council to engage teens in Library Community.
Tour high school and college students. Assist in high school and college level projects. Leadership groups create interactive tour for students.
Iím intrigued by the idea of Wenatchee learns as we heard about in the video and wonder how a similar Organization could be set up locally. I manage a STEM career day for the 7th graders in our 5 county region.
PW Develop Eng Internship (paid) for high school students (public works). Accounting skills connect with Government entities. Multiple opportunities auditor, treasurer, public works grants every office / department Needs. Book keeping skills tie in with teachersí curriculum. Do not add to teachersí roles. Rather reinforces Resources and supports schools.
Would like to see a list of businesses open to having youth connect for just a short touch or for an outside Organization have the ability to build those bridges beyond teachers in the classroom.
Would like the county government to provide summer work experience in all aspects.
CTE classes at the high school (need to be expanded) Community internship program initiated on June 1 through part of the Dalles sponsorship.
Set up student paid internships. Some industry partners have realized that they need to recruit and retain local talent. This is my first year placing student in internships with the hope that it will take off.
Robotics in Agriculture ñ Automation in Agriculture ñ Precision farming practices/equipment.
EDC/OIC in Adams County and the Othello S.D. are planning as Othello career showcase in the fall that has many of the components discussed today.
Teach the teacher programs (Spokane) ñ want to know more.
Advanced manufacturing ñ placement (Switzerland) 
-Education needs to partner with industry to offer placement programs for students in high demand jobs.
Grand Coulee Dam, BOR, GCDSD, and Colville Tribe.
Sharing my own work experience. How my path of work has got me to where I am today. Where I went to college. How I ended up doing what I do. I earned my AAs in machine technology at North Idaho College.
Work experience, on the job training, job fairs, work readiness classes, orientation/tours, and presentations. (outreach)
Donít know of ìexistingî ones in place. Need ìoutreachî to industry champions locally to see if any of the CCL ideas might work for them. ìWork Based Learning Opportunityî Spokane ìTeach the Teacherî program.
CafÈ 119 ñ FCCLA/Foods ñ catering. Orders are taken for meals from staff approximately once a month meals are delivered to staff. Accounting portion of business is now being run through business class.
Department of Labor Funds and Support to Ag workers/dependents. 
Work experience ñ paid. Job readiness training on the job, tuition assistance, and support services.
My son began with an internship. A couple employers took him under their wing. Taught him, sent him to classes, he then moved up the ladder. They hired him before he was done with college. The company motivated him and he realized he enjoyed the job. In 5 years he has earned his way to the top of the pay scale. People believing in him and his dedicated work ethics have gotten him there.
ï	Chemical dependency counselors trainees: pay to get clinical hours $23.00/hr
ï	CNAís: 18 years old minimum will pay to train.
ï	Drug free coalition members.
Thinkers pace, internship, hired out of programs, and every program ran like a job.
I have offered job shadowing at my office, guild mortgage and am happy to continue to offer that. My husband owns and operates affordable auto repair and would offer job shadowing as well for the automotive repair trade when available.
Columbia Basin Job Corps CCC. Holistic, presidential, national career learning program for youth 16-24 years old. 125 campuses across all 50 states 100 career fields to choose attends school closest to home that offers career training at interest. Tours available year round.
More meetings between industry and the school where we can ask them what they need so we can change our curriculum for our students.
Work site tours, career fairs, job shadowing, co-op learning, school programs, FFA, AWS student section ñ mentoring and industry speakers.
Our senior project requires a ìjob shadowî that is getting harder and harder to get industry to host.
Job seeker training series ñ job readiness skills, interviewing, structured interview questions, resume, cover letter. How to get a job, keep a job, career building, social media/online resumes.
Internships (ATS), clinical settings (nursing/MA), externships (trades) for instructors, and annual career fair.
Shared ñ Farmer Omak High School e.g. health/education
Natural Resource classes like Okanogan ecology. Where we get professionals in biology-based jobs in the classroom. Also, we get to go out in the field and collect. With professional to see what it is like to do a job in the field. 
Career camps and workshops for youth.
Apprenticeship/mentorship programs to develop and retain talent, skills, education, and loyalty of our community for the benefit of the community.
High school 21 and up and outreach in worksource ñ Okanogan (Omak) Nespelem (CCT collaboration) and Twisp (Twisp works collaboration) starting fall 2017 ñ primary expansion of adult basic ed in WVEís district ñ plus 1 new I-BEST track in business computer tech starting in 2018.
Preparing for jobs, apprenticeships across the state, computer science. What is happening here at Peninsula College and the training.
Aluminum welding with Armstrong marine internships, BAS internships with local businesses, Allied Health clinicals and practicums (medical assisting, NAS, MIRS) Mia Boster, mboster@pencol.edu (Peninsula College)
Bringing a CCL candidate into a kevin.loult@wsbdc.org 
Having direct partnerships with employers and educational programs and vocational rehabilitation programs
Connecting with kids through STEM and other venues ìAî is for animal veterinary technician, ìVî is for veterinarian (Molly Dickson office@bluemountainvet.com 360-457-3842
There used to be a great program at the high school called ìhealth sciencesî This program introduced students to different fields of healthcare and gets them hands on experience for use after high school
Citizens of Sequim council has a high school student representative siting (observing, liaison role)
WIN (women in networking) program in Sequim (on hiatus)
Robotics ñ local engineer?
SEF (Sequim Education Foundation) teacher grants, film festivals, science cafes, etc
Soroptimist: ìgirls dayî Ann Sonle, City of Sequim Resource Manager, 360-582-2436 
Our new collaboration with worksource and schools. Job prep. Hiring events. Reverse job fair
Brandino Gibson, worksource Clallam 477-1582
WSU ñ college of agricultural, human, and natural resource sciences. Spark programs. Industry high school students to career opportunities in the field of agriculture. WSU research and extension centers.
The center for civic engagement has many opportunities for college (WSU) students and youth in the area with our volunteers.
Alaska Airlines Imagine Tomorrow competition at WSU. Student internship program in the City of Colfax.
WSU senior interior design students create a unique pavilion using generative design software that drives robotic cutting of forms used to create the pavilion. No two forms are identical, this could only be done using robotics.
-	Industry tour collaboration between WSU career services (academic success and career center) and the college of arts and sciences to visit Spokane WSU campus/area hospitals. Financial support needed for every student who wants to can attend.
-	University college career develop course: partnering. For the first time with college of arts and sciences to begin. Steps toward a req. career course for all CAS students: Needs funds to have program coordinator to over see and create replicable program. 
Business Plan Competition ñ Entrepreneurship Program
Conversation based projects, forming 12th grade projects required for high school graduation.
Marker livestock ñ 4-H ñ FFA connects youth 9-19 with ranchers and food providers for learning about the meat industry. Also, provides a summer job with learning on how to work, grow, and market.
SBSD is actively working on expanding construction trades CTE program with apprenticeships.
I am involved in a culinary arts program that covers a broad range of hospitality and industry issues.
Internships at visitors center and job shadow program.
I want to start a beauty school with cosmetology barbering programs for our county.
Community center/education center combination.
Shadowing, mentoring, internships. STEM mentoring of at-risk youth. Challenges: liability ñ time away from work. Rural nurses (local need for retention and hiring cost).
Industry certificates in the following: production technician, logistics technician, basic industrial maintenance, welding, solid works, CAD/CA<, precision machining, auto tech. Articulation agreements with high schools for many of these programs.
Enterprise (Pasco), Team Pasco Homes, Tri Tech Tiny Homes or Habitat, Pasco High Occ Fair, CHS STEM cohorts, PSD mock interviews, avid at MS PSD and CHS, work based learning opportunities at HS; CTE courses offered. 
Delta tries to continually expand its CCL opportunities and area open to new partnerships would love to talk with anyone who would like ideas or wants to get more involved (Heather Hoppe, heather.hoppe@thedeltahighschool.com) 
Job development/job seekers avocation to employers about veterans. Informational interviews/job shadowing for veterans seeking employment. Direct hire URA options for veterans seeking federal employment. Mock interviews for veterans by industry professionals and HR staff targeted to their desired employment field. (Nick Erickson, 509-734-5949, nerickson@esd.wa.gov)
Career connect 2017, occurring Oct 9-11, 2017 at the Three Rivers Convention Center and Coliseum. Sponsored by Mission Support Alliance. Focus includes a career fair, college fair, student field trips, high school STEM scholarship competition, key note speakers, panel discussions and breakout sessions. (Tracy hale, 509-438-5686, tracy_hale@rl.gov
Guided pathways ñ helping students figure out a major. Part of that is a career exploration so they know what careers available in their area.
Will review worksourcewa.com to see is WRPS shows up on the search functions. Will review apprenticeships program for incorporation at WRPS.
We do not currently engage in CCL programs and want to learn more to partner in the community.
STEM flicks! Build awareness of careers- k-12) cyber challenge engagement, WBL at PNNL, getting S/E staff/STEM professionals in front of students, STEM it now like CCL for educators (frances.smith@pnnl.gov)
Building local schools with accredited apprenticeships and preapp. Our hands on career day  and our partnerships with local contractors provide a great opportunity to gain interest in the skilled trades. Additionally, there are may missed opportunities to provide vocational education in high schools which would allow welding and electrical certifications right out of high school. 19 year olds with family wage careers! (nick@ua598.org, 509-539-7917)
High school work source initiatives- Ambassador program tour work source connections. Occupational career fair (Pasco high) assisted. Industry sector projects ñ upskill/backfill projects (Donna Kunk, dkunk@esd.wa.gov)
Million Women Mentors (MWM is part of STEM connector) ñ Washington: program is especially important for keeping college ñ level women in STEM- in the Tri-Cities, WSUTC is next door to PNNL (many mentors come from them). Connects STEM mentors with female students pursuing STEM careers in WA. Mentors are invaluable especially for women and minorities pursuing STEM careers. 50% of women drop out of STEM fields after the first 10 years. Mentors can help greatly with retention. (jillian.cadwell@tricity.wsu.edu, 509-847-4700)
OIC of Washington utilizes existing short-term certificate programs to both substantiate and build on workers existing skills. We provide career guidance and facilitate access to supportive resources like tuition assistance, paid internships and on the job training. Our target population is agricultural workers and their dependents. Examples: commercial driverís license, certified nursing assistant, logistics tech.
The league of education voters is working on landscaping career connected learning opportunities across the state of Washington (ruvine@educationvoters.org)
How to host a high school intern. Connecting the importance of career learning in high school. (Juli Weisgerber, juli.weisgerber@thedeltahighschool.com)
We, International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 302, have 2 credited Apprenticeship programs within the state of Washington and currently have numerous apprentices working on projects throughout the state. Apprenticeship utilization provisions help to insure these apprentices have the jobs and training that makes our programs a success. (mbosse@ivoe302.org, 509-545-1811, 509-294-3824)
CTE courses in middle school. RSD is opening our first stEAM middle school. Course offering will include computer science discoveries, robotics, computer aided design, makerspace, intro to design, and computer essentials. Teachers will also develop and implement interdisciplinary STEAM projects in collaboration with industry professionals (Andre Hargunani, andre.hargunani@rsd.edu, 509-578-9975)
Every October we do National youth Science Experiment and Science Exploration day with local agencies and/or professionals. We do 3-day mini camps around STEM 4-H projects. Each spring we have a gear up for fair day to explore the project opportunities beyond animals for air exhibition. (Natalie (kinion)Stott, WSU Extension Benton and Franklin counties, nkinion@wsu.edu, 509-545-3511)
We are working on implementing a student volunteer internship program at the department of energy for high school seniors- grad school. These would be unpaid internships for students to gain experience and exposure to what we are doing at Hanford. (Robyn Burt, 509-376-1228)
Mentoring and internship program
Access in rural communities
WorkSource partners ñ sharing info with schools middle schools and high schools
The goal of the Learning Academy modeled at the Shelton SD (at least from what Iíve heard and I will certainly advocate for) expansion of the academies throughout the high school in multiple tracks so ALL students have opportunity to experience career connected learning ñ get out of the classroom and learn ìreal worldî skills.
Community Governance by sitting on the board
Lemonade Day (aka Google)
Graduation matters
Field STEM (NRS based job training /Eco Education
Health Sciences in Shelton School District
USDA Pathways Interns
We have lots of programs
Evergreen Interns
People are coding, WSU is helping provide training in coding and data analysis. The Port of Allyn is also involved in launching a code academy for north mason residents. 
Graduationmattersshelton
We have 7 school districts
I have an 18 yr child in the north Thurston, (had school in new market skill center)
Career navigator program Americorp Vista Program with Washington campus compact. Career exploration and readiness, mentorship, job shadows. CCL embedded in general ed class ñ example =English or communication class including paper or speech assignment with topic at self-career exploration.
Dislike the term ìmiddle skillsî for people who have a vocational job, rather than attending a 4-year college.
After school manufacturing program in the works at Central Valley school district. Job rotation on within Eastmont school district.
Through AGC events were planned for high school students to participate in a day long program of running equipment see different programs at the CCS Utah Diesel/Tech pathways program.
Rotary mentorships, virtual internships, internships in a box. Why is this referring to ìmiddle skillî? Makes it seem a less than option.
I think what I saw in the initial videos is what CTE does or tries to do. This is significantly undersold and underappreciated if you look at the attention. These prep programs are provided across the state.
Career and technical education courses in our district give our kids direction. I wish more were directed to the programs available rather than directing to 4-year university path. PLTW programs do an amazing job connecting students to careers.
WSOS Scholars (college students) are self select into the skills that shine program wherein they are paired with a professional mentor and mentored through a guided discussions concerning resume building, interview skills, and networking. It is currently being expanded.
-	Career cafÈ lunch with professionals invite teachers and counselors.
-	T-2-4 circuit on fair instead of ìcollege fairî.
-	Interest inventory results.
-	Lemonade Day
Projects lead the way K-12 curriculum in engineering. Computer science and biomedical science include career research and shadowing opportunities in every class.
-	Projects lead the way connections with business community through guest speakers, review of projects, mentorship, STEM cafes ñ throw out real world problem and challenge students for solutions.
-	WSOS ñ mentorship programs.
-	Business after school
-	Lemonade Day
-	Strong WBL Program ñ PT with SFCC
-	Important role of CTE advisory committees
WSU has several departmental internship programs, some requires for graduation within certain majors. In the department affiliate with, these opportunities are both in industry and academia. 
Career Fairs and ìspeed interviewsî with employers at Spokane community college.
Thurston Co WSU extension offers an 11 weeks Cultivating success class that teachers farm planning. It brings in Farmers as instructors and provides networking opportunities that could lead to job opportunities.
Grubís CTE ñ based youth development programs in Olympia School District, Tumwater School Districts, Eatonville, Grays Harbor Health Department summer job training combined with 4 period CTE block class for sophomores engaging kids in giving food for school districts nutrition programs.
All of it.
The program I am involved with is prison to work. The idea is to get interested people certified in hazmat and related education so when they get out of jail they have a well paying job. The hope is to keep them out of jail.
For juniors and seniors in college we offer an internship (paid) for aspiring financial advisors ñ statewide.
Work based learning coordination with local businesses dual credit articulation with SPSCC. CTF courses ñ Business, Agriculture, welding/woods, robotics/STEM courses. Various service projects in community.
We the city of Tenino has partnered with TESC on multiple projects and internships. We have used TESC due to their ease of working with the MPA program. Iíve made attempts with local community colleges but not with difficulty.
Forest Festival Field Day ñ 5th graders 350-450 students learning about the timber industry from seeding to log. Forestry Internships ñ Aimed at 2nd year forestry students gain experience in the three main aspects of forestry (cruising, forest management and marketing/sales).
I am excited by regions that have integrated W10A/WEX/Apprenticeship/pre-apprenticeship. There is not enough of it happening yet, but some signs of success ñ Iron workers are a great best practice to look toward. Contact is Greg Christiansen (206) 244-2993.
Coding/robotics for kids/families ñ ages preschool through high school. Through Timberland Regional Library, we provide access to the internet/computers and online courses through Microsoftís Imagine Academy.
STEM programs in libraries specifically coding/robotics, but also the S.E.M. Kendra Jones at Timberland for more information. The library also offers career data bases and can speak to groups about them. Also, databases with free classes, test prep, and more Microsoft Imagine Academy Through the state library. Wonder works program in North Mason Library (Belfair) like a maker space over a week.
USDA Rural Developmentís Distance Learning and Telemedicine Program has financed distance learning for youth and adult in rural areas. One such project was on the Spokane Indian Reservation. Their isolated school district in Wellpinit received a grant for computers and connectivity. Local teachers arranged for students to be apart of classrooms around the world. Graduation rates increased significantly and those pursuing higher education.
Professional ñ Technical programs of SPSCC have advisory boards that ensure programs are tied to industry; tech prep; cooperative work experience opportunities that tie prot-tech students to work-based learning; career fairs; internship pipeline project with EDC and Pac Mtn WDC; Skills USA ñ SPSCC clubs as well as host K-12 clubs.
Construction career day events. 6-8 statewide every year. Individual talks to school classes. Apprenticeship Utilization with students working on that project.
Future city competition.
CTE offers career exploration opportunities in every program area, or at least they should. CTSOs help with that exploration and exposing students to post high school jobs and careers. Supervised agricultural experience projects, placement programs, work based learning, ectÖ all already exist.
-STED1 ñ South Thurston Economic Development Initiative 
-RT ñ H2T ñ CTR ñ (Rural Transit, Here to There: accessthm www.trpc.org vet transport (after school ROOF & BGG)
-SSMCP (South Sound Military communities partnership)
-Thurston Thrives (local food systems, active communities)
-State Acct/Agency Council on Coordinated Trans (WSDOT)
Math for Life ñ Connecting business and education through a scavenger hunt to local businesses
Find your Future ñ Biannual career day connecting students with business professionals in the community to share ìhow toî become that profession.
Business 2 Youth Boards ñ Job shadows mentoring and other career connected leaning activity.
ResCare Youth Services ñ WIOA funded program that pays for work experiences, barrier mitigation for at-risk youth. Will Yeager William.Yeager@rescare.com
Lego mind storm robotics circulation kits preceded by training sessions for librarians across the state. Also, several other STEAM related circulation kits (e.g. eggbots, snap circuits, makey makey) all for libraries and their communities.
STEM robotics classrooms ñ volunteers, sponsors. STEM robotics competitions, mentors, volunteers, sponsors
Rainier/Yelm grant ñ exploring Technical Education and apprenticeship through site visits, speakers, mentorship and video development.
CTSO ñ Career Technical Student leadership organization (FFA, FBLA, NFCA, SkillsUSA, WIEA/Publishing, Technical theater, STEM Robotics) engaged in community, career, and leadership. Initial conversation with Dy Martin builders on job shadow/mentorship opportunities. What employers want panel. CTE Advisory meeting with students and parents.
-K-12 students: Tree planting NWLT/Drone flying/Robotics NW Trek partners with 9-12--biological/environmental work. 
-GRITS- Growing Relationships in the Soil ñ project based high school program on rural farm in Ohop Valley.
-3 STEM Elementary Schools: OSPI
-1st year AP computer Science course
-Innovative Schools OSPI
PNWUís Roots to wings mentorship programs with Yakama Tribal School and Toppenish District.
The importance to identify business partners who are committed to provide job training, internships, apprenticeships, and interest in work with schools by active collaboration.
K-12 College and Career Readiness/Career Technical Education/STEM
-	We have upper valley and lower valley CTE/STEM directors that can provide inventory of what K-12 has from middle school then high school.
I currently coordinate an employment program for foster youth that is 6 weeks of employment workshops and 6 weeks on an in-house internship. I think there is a need for employment resources for more vulnerable populations like foster youth and homeless youth who have distinct barriers.
WSL/WBL opportunities, career and hiring fairs, mock interviews. Need opportunities for 16-18 year old students. Need current opportunities for students to get food indoor. New idea: Business take-over day. Reps from business come into all classes and teach a lesson so students see the connection of what they are learning in CR to work.
Cascadia Tech (skills center) has 16 programs that are focused on career-connected learning. Our students participate in internship programs and we have 250+ business community members who serve on our advisory committees. Internship can be short (2 weeks ñ 20 hours) or long 90+ hours.
Apprenticeship program(s) at Clark College, Youin First Program of partners In Careers, Youin works Program of partners In Careers, Pre-Apprenticeship Program of Partners In Careers.
TWIST
Connect community members with resources/agencies in this community. E.g. Microsoft Certificate course/exam through the libraries (website) and Clark College.
Our organization heard a student from CC that had an opportunity grant that toured our facility while enrolled in a welding technology program. He is now one of our best promising employees.
Vancouverís Innovation Partnership Zone ñ a zone to expand and recruit tech companies ñ has an education component. 
CREDC ñ new strategies plan in development (2017 Clark County Comprehensive Economic Development Plan). One of 3 goals is to ìsupport peopleî emphasis on building and strengthening the workforce pipeline, including fostering skills development and preparing youth for economic development (focus on expanding career connected learning opportunities and industry alignment). Implementation plan being developed with Education Committee engagement.
Walla Walla ñ CCL projects to share
Pitch-It Event:  $10,000 prize money split between winners + finalists receive a 1 year mentorship with a local business; Walla Walla University/Walla Walla Community College (WWCC)/Whitman College/local high school and grade school students participated; started 3 years ago
WSU Gear-Up Program to go to business week during the summertime;
9-12th grade students learn about different aspects of a business/profession at either the Central Washington or Gonzaga campus; tuition assistance available (cost is $800); end of the week they pitch their company and receive investment dollars
Walla Walla County 4-H Program (career pathways explorations)
Gates Foundation Grant for a Community Network Coordinator; unfortunately grant support has run out; placed high school students as intern at a local business and was seen as effective
WISE: bringing 8th graders to Whitman College to go to classes (to experience what is like to be in college)
300-400 Whitman College students involved annually in community service in Walla Walla; many intern at Walla Walla Public Schools with America Reads/America Counts, Story Time Projects
College Place: a half-day financial literacy event for freshman where they are given a career and salary, and then ìbuyî various items (house, car, food, etc.) and have to balance their finances
Junior Achievement Program: for K-12, recently expanding into Columbia County; entrepreneurship topics discussed and projects pursued, financial literacy explored
Emberfuel Coworking Space in downtown Walla Walla: ow-risk, low cost space for local entrepreneurs working to start their own small business
SEATech Skills Center
CTE ñ Internship program ñ foundry which resulted in a job, 3D CAD resulted in a job
Series of classes in the County Library on financial literacy, life skills; summer reading program focused on ìbuild a better worldî
Worksource has been visiting WWCC campus re career opportunities available 
ìTry a Tradeî event at WWCC (through the Perkins Grant); event on campus for high school students, non-traditional students and community members; opportunities to actually try (hands-on) a trade like welding, electrical, etc.


*****
 
2.	Do you have any thoughts or reactions to the Policy Document or speakers?

Exciting to hear about statewide partnerships. Questions: NOW WHAT? Both at state level and local levels.
Would like to see the ten year gap between high school and technical school target. Governor Inslee stated average age of technical school is 28. 
Excited about the programs presented and the future potential this offers.
A bit too much focus on apprenticeship and ìwe donít have stem jobs.î Needs more focus on how ìworkî is changing.
Great first steps of the program. Life skills in general are important for those entering the workforce, soft skills along with technical skills are essential. Canít have one without the other.
Expanding awareness to both teachers and parents on training, technology and resources for CCL opportunities is necessary. Parents are equally important to make aware. Canít rely on education alone.
I hope that CCL is not just confined to STEM, there are many kinds of jobs and careers no identified as STEM, that would make good opportunities and what STEM competencies apply to jobs and careers not labeled STEM, such as knowing how to read budgets (planners, etc) And how about 21 century skills that employers identify as critical in employees- the ability to work with others to analyze sources and research on issues and find information.
Underserved communities do have different needs, organizations like EIW possesses a solid understanding of the needs which include mentors that resemble the students that are underserved. This is the priority the alternatives are much more significant & costly, crime, prison, under employment, children with limited resources, continuation, not to mention healthcare and other impacts. Kauffman report shares finding that seen very relevant. 
None (IIII)
Great group of speakers ñ would like to hear more about construction and apprenticeship progress.
It is a good document. But will we stay with it long enough to see results? I hope for our students and communities we do. Q: Why and how did WA STEM get tasked with evaluations. I would think the workforce boards and CTE leaders should be added.
$1 million donation to WA STEM should be shared with current K-12 CTE programs to enhance and expand. Many references to underserved people and however, not many people of color highlighted as presenters.
I support all of the components identified in the policy document and many of the ideas shared by the speakers. Very interested in figuring out how policy gets implemented and how to best support our students and our local employers and non-profit organizations.
Very inspiring and excited about the policy framework for expanding CCL. Great support from many different stakeholders. 
What does evaluation and accountability look like? Are young people approached to give ideas and participations?
Exciting to see how many people are at the table ñ but now we have to get to work! Time to put into place, we canít keep discussing it and hoping.
I think that everything in all is amazing that how many people have connected in this way.
We need to stop always associating STEM with engineers and high end jobs. WA STEM needs to highlight apprenticeship and understand that all jobs, involve math and science etc. Many of our students are not graduating because of their fear of math. How do we challenge these notions? That kids not good enough to master math, science etc. Please stop stressing engineering only WA STEM!!
Learners/students/and community members need to be fully included in the biz work force board deliberations and discussions. CCL need to be naming ìeducationî for current employees as well as young people! Youth and community representation & Insleeís Workforce!! 
We need businesses to buy into this mentally not necessarily financially. JP Morgan talking to industry.
Nice words, would like to see specifics outcomes and goals.
Love the idea of redefining/broadening success for high school students. Love the focus on early childhood education. How will it be funded? WCC would like to work with local high school educators to help them acquire skills and access resources to establish cyber patriot teams/clubs/classes. Mentorship- WCC developed program for ECE practitioners to men for ECE student.
Language impacts ìmiddle skillsî denotes a less than skill. Use of words like talents or technical skills leave a stronger message.
Career clarity, developed through CCL is a large part of the career decision and development process. Pathway clarity is also important which includes details about educational paths, credential attainment and ongoing career growth opportunities. The CTE systems work on graded pathways may provide an opportunity for intersection and development of this components. 
The emphasis on early childhood avocation in Washington must continue. Community college can play a significant role given our ability to attract non-traditional students. Whatcom Community College is leading efforts through contracts with DEL and the state board of community and technical colleges. A center of excellence should be created at Whatcom Community College to cement this leadership. 
We need to change the term ìmiddle skillsî!!
Brilliant partnerships ñ glad they went to Switzerland and Mexico to learn how global STEM works successfully. Need to translate into solid local programs.
We must be careful with language ìmiddle skillsî can have some unintended connotations: not top skill, average, mediocre, etc ? perhaps we tlak about ìtalentsî or ìskill diversity.î
Inspiring. Dislike the term ìmiddle skillsî = judgement and has a negative connotation. We like talents (top talents) technically. We all have different ìtalents.î
A lot of jobs in WA can be fulfilled through 2 year degrees. Many people donít go to CC and Technical colleges until 28 
Computer science classes are needed to increase career connected learning. 
Importance of apprenticeships and teacher training.
Need of business and industry commitment and connections. Importance of soft skills.
6 million for CCL and 6 million for CS
It was interesting to hear what is going on especially that WA is one of 6 states in this program.
I like the momentum being generated and funded to pursue CCL. Still high level, steps to achieve results are not clear.
We need the money- initiative not much without support.
ìMiddle skillsî term should be changes to emphasis on different pathway to success through CE Technical Colleges (certified programs) I loves the new superintendents view of the needs and how k-12has evolved.
I was excited to learn that the superintendent was going to re-focus efforts on the 20% of dropouts and 30% of grads not attending college towards CCL and vocation training workforce development.
We needed something more tangible. When this passes what do we as business members do to be an active participant in this.
I encourage you to stop using the term ìwrong peopleî it creates a gap in an us vs them type of way.
What about the work we are doing?
Mentorship is key. Youth may not have support systems, at home that would foster success. Mentorship will support these efforts.
Appreciated SSIís start re passion ? career vs pushing college for all
Kudos to Siemens and the middle skills focus
How many/how much regional grants from $1 million JP Morgan gift
Where was econ dev rep vs chamber? Higher education? 
ìon the screenî not shown, please split screen for future events
Enjoyed hearing. Want to learn more.
Appreciate the focus on public/private partnership! Letís make sure we ask business to really invest ñ time, creative solutions, money, knowledge, expertise, mentoring, etc.
Chris Reykdal brought innovative thinking, David Etzwiler, Apprenticeship, Maud Davdon Washington residents connect to Washington jobs. Gov Inslee ñ Washington leads the nation in CCL. Missed Culinary in Spokane as 1st youth program. 900,000 jobs to fill, CCL vital to filling those jobs, growing apprenticeships viable path. Brad Smith -fully supportive of youth opportunities in apprenticeships. Microsoft support key factor.
Recognizing that all students do not need a four year degree, major corporations support certificates. 
Great to hear about pushing OJT and apprenticeships but I worry hearing that and seeing reality with businesses not being receptive to hosting apprenticeships as they do not have the time. This is even heightened concerns in more rural areas with fewer and smaller businesses.
This work has been occurring and development at least since 1984 and is an ongoing focus for work force programs and federal Perkins funding. The work is exciting and of particular interest will be determining an effective assessment without imposing our regulation and reporting requirements for both k12 and higher education. Maintain focus on providing trained professional career advisors. 
Would like to know how the Washington state CTE/CCL agency plans to insure that rural underserved districts receive funding/resources/support.
This was a great hurrah! Presentation but how does this translate to our local areas? Who will champion this? How will we embrace private-public partnerships where not only the public (taxpayers) bear the burden (while companies prosper?)
Recent increases in graduation requirements coupled with a standardized test score graduation requirement seem to conflict with the desire of CCL to expand pathways to student success. To fully realize the potential of CCL graduation requirements may need to be adjusted and made more flexible to the unique needs of our students.
Really glad to hear about expanding CCL access to rural areas! Letís hope it can be put into practice, soon.
Great ideas, hope that the money from state follows.
Interesting average apprenticeship age is 27. Like the idea of making that number younger. Hearing that certificates can be considered instead of the degree. I didnít go into college because why go into debt when I didnít know what to do. I like the job shadowing idea, might have helped me see the options.
Happy to hear big companies (Siemans, JP Morgan) are supporting 2 year degrees, certificates, job shadowing, etc.
Please keep in mind youth with disabilities. I think you need to educate employers about disabilities (hidden as well) to reduce the stigma and open their doors to job shadowing.
Excellent policy direction and speakers; results will depend on local implementation and communication.
Not really comfortable with the term ìmiddle-skillî it confused the issues of skills vs specialization
Liked the ìteach the teacherî concept in Spokane.
Liked consideration for small and rural district challenges.
Grad requirements need to be made more flexible if we are going to meet the goal of creating more middle skill employees. 
I think the potential of making sure that people have the opportunity to further training and education in order to be self sufficient. 
Great to see some ìbig gunsî Siemens- JP Morgan- Chase-Microsoft. Hopefully this is more than a beginning, sustainability is necessary to have viable programs.
Using the word ìmiddle skillî is very condescending. Do more than just talk about the rural population, make sure those communities get the support needed to participate and produce. Increase involvement with the community college system, corporate + continuing education department as they have been building and implementing apprenticeships and work based learning for decades.
Iím curious about the specifics: what will change to support on-site opportunities in industry and professions? How will we be updated on next steps ìon the groundî steps?
Iím excited by the opportunities our state is presenting to youth and the investment in our youth. I hope the Governorís task force will include representation from all regions of the state. Cowlitz county students are very different from King county students and communities.
Speakers were good, but too many speakers and difficult to stay on schedule.
It is exciting to think that youth will be exposed to work force training and exploration at younger ages.
It is a great goal for Washington to be number one in Career Connected Learning, CCL needs to begin at the Junior High and High School levels
Per typical wordsmithing what I hear is ìwho do we get the (ìunderprivilegedî) into good jobs.î What the hell is underprivileged anyway? A little history lesson on our greatest generation and their remarkable successes despite routine poverty within their ranks! I predict a huge investment at taxpayer expense when the biggest successes will be in small groups let by good mentors at minimal cost! In addition to education we also must cease to reward non-work the well fare fixation is repugnant when we live in a country where there are more jobs than people. Fact: we are talking about the middle group of kids. The upper group ñ they have already won. The very bottom who knows ñ the middle through ñ huge ñ give them hope and directions ñ emphasize possibilities ñ they can be winners too!
What about the rural areas?
We (Stevens County) need to focus on our local needs!
Too I-5 corridor and STEM centric
Nicely laid out pamphlet does not give any action items
Glad they are interested in promoting CCL. The focus seemed too centered on STEM. There are other job needs and opportunities. Would like to see actionable items ñ especially for rural areas.
Way too focused on I-5 corridor ñ needed a speaker with ties to Eastern, Central, or Coastal Washington
Rural areas like Lincoln county need grant funding.
A little too much pomp and circumstance.
High school credits need to reflect common skills.
All classes and content need to apply practically, answer the question of why it is important not just what.
Small and rural are not all the same. Segregate the paradigm by delinking numbers, population and zip code.
Funding for a career to graduation program such at NAV101 in the public school system as needed.
Grants are nice but now to access them is needed as well.
Can this be re-viewed (available online) at a later date or shared so those who could not attend can watch?
I am so impressed with how much Siemens is doing for STEM in our state. I love that Siemens is trying to re-image middle skill jobs. This is so needed! I love that the Governor is acknowledging that students need these opportunities.
Exciting to see the momentum and enthusiasm for CCL Training in Trauma informed care will be crucial in serving underserved populations as well. More youth driven curriculum/development in CCL would be beneficial for buy-in and effectiveness.
I agree with the policy and have been helping students see this as a genius pathway for them. College can teach students with certificates that can make a good life possible.
Love the emphasis on economic living wage and support for preserving and growing a middle class. Still concerned about tracking and socioeconomic stratification in who had access and opportunity to 4 year and advanced degrees ñ which, I assume every speaker leader today has
Private public partnerships are critical to compete in a global economy. Of the 1300 participants I wonder what percentage understood how CCL can evolve. I also wonder to what extent the task force will reach down into elementary and middle school programs.
The work that Seimanís doing can be a great model for other employers
Appreciated hearing the connection to work based (WBL) learning ? CTE ? CCL. Wondering how WBL will be funded in comparison to CCL or are they going to be the same thing? If not the same thing will they be equally supported money wise and regulated?
See Table 5 sheet
Talk about apprenticeship and trade jobs was most interesting
Really important ñ Emphasis on rural/underserved communities
-	Importance of mentoring
-	Partnerships
Well done!!! I am excited to seeing what our state plan looks like
Chris Reykdahlís message is refreshing, exciting and encouraging! Transforming how we educate all of our students is right on the money!! Focus ìyoung people successful and employers prosper.î 
Still hearing the message that mid-level careers are ìless thanî 4-year college careers.
How will this initiative make its way down to the schools where the real work needs to be done? (sounds like ìCTEî ìWSLî etc that weíve been trying to do for many yearsÖ)
24 credits are a barrier to exploration
>750,000 jobs in the next 10 yearsÖHow are we preparing our current students for these opportunities?
Itís so refreshing to know that CCL is now relevant and apprenticeship is a valid career choice that is not just for the ìunemployableî it has STEM 
Business partnership
Engaging industry is ìnotî easy (in part leaders in industry donít understand) They are short staffed ìnowî so they want graduating seniors who they can hire versus investing in their future and exposing younger students in career opportunities.
Emphasis or work based 
Siamonds foundation website
Workbased Learning Academy
JP Morgan $1 million grant
If high school students are going to be doing internships in industry it needs to be a substantial time commitment from student. Employers are very busy and want to invest in serious time-committed individuals. In manufacturing, it takes time away from production to train/mentor. Itís a short-term potential loss with the potential to build a long term investment in a pipeline.
Fantastic to hear the push for career related learning!! I saw the benefit in this for 25 years as a career counselor in Everett School District. The local skills center was the best thing ever for kids. Why arenít all high schools CTE schools! You must legislate our 4 year colleges and teacher education programs in particular to be career- based learning. The emphasis on ìacademicî learning is the biggest impediment to success of all students.
It is incredible to see our state be at the forefront of CCL
A strong commitment to STEM work with state made efforts. A plan to reach students that may not need higher education
Excited to know and hear that the governor is serious about this! Because we desperately need promising practices, resources, and targeted policies aimed at increasing career related opportunities in high-demand STEM jobs for Washingtonís youth.
Iím excited about the contributions from Chase and WIO look forward to helping move CCL forward in SnoCo. 
Will 12 million be enough?
How does Spokane Extern program compare to WARS? Snohomish county is doing a lot- need to communicate better.
Great message and focus to STEM and CCL. The policy is exciting to see and the vision to put Washington State at the leader in education and CCL
Outstanding engagement. How do we meet the need of 750,000 jobs in the next 5 years? It will take a focused effort to engage private
Integrating career learning
The apprenticeship programs need to be geared more towards high school students
Teacher externships ñ we need to pursue this!
Wat are the length of commitment, is this going to be covered under basic education?
Excellent initiative.
Loss of ìsocial contractî is true ñ people expect 4 year degrees for a stable job but apprenticeships also work
Having major business partners (Microsoft, JP morgan, MacDonald Mils ) step up to the plate to engage and support the work is very valuable and help turn the momentum in the direction.
It is what career and technical education has been pushing for the last 10 years
I like the direction, aligns with WFDC
Reyhdahl public/private/3 + 4 yr old
Governor Dude (NGA) IOWA leaders UTAH leaders
David Egweiler, Siemens Foundation, World affaris Council DC
Focus ìskillsî ? talent development ? equality
State policy tends to stay at that level and doesnít truly transform k-12 education practice. Love the ideas, yet Iíll wait and see what actually transpires.
How do we expose and connect youth to career opportunities without adding to the intense pressures they feel to be ìsuccessfulî? How can we ensure this is a supportive rather than obligatory program?
Lots of great ideas here.
Rural and underserved communityís ability to locate in rural areas vs employer trends
Access and avenues to break poverty cycle give kids skills to help future.
It is very comprehensive love the fact that rural and disadvantaged communities is a focus and the integration with the high school and beyond.
I loved how there was a focus on embracing individual pathways to help students succeed. It is ok to find a track for a career that isnít just a 4 year degree.
Itís got to be a local effort. 
Avoid the term ìmid-levelî
David Etzwilerís meritocratic comments about the ìsocial contractî of working hard and getting ahead failed to acknowledge that not everyone has that opportunity historically. I appreciate that rural and undeserved communities are mentioned on the 1st page of the policy document and would like to know more. Donít leave disabled queer and transgender folks behind. They should be a part of that ìundeservedî population.
It was great to hear about the outreach to K-12 students. Hopefully it is something that also speaks to the parents and students.
Policy needs to include input from young people. Webinar should include student speakers. Every policy should have a focus on under represented, veterans, access, communities of color, (like youth and adult apprenticeships policy text).
I would encourage more diversity that represents the state of Washington with the speakers, particularly when we talk about serving the under-served.
ìMiddle Skillî implies ongoing hierarchy/stigma. Increased diversity in leadership including business partners. Plan is missing conversation on hoe to break down barriers to employment (both in training and hiring). Make sure that apprenticeships have program structure to benefit everyone and avoid exploitation.
Ensure that underserved populations being targeted participate on the task force. Excited about youth apprenticeship. Employers and educators need to ensure students are on a pathway with mobility.
Please remember itís not all about STEM. There are many pathways that are not directly STEM but are still in demand careers. We used to be so careful to not ìtrackî students, but why donít we help them track themselves so they are pathway driven?
I appreciated Chris Revklals comments and the commitment to CTE.
Accountability ñ We noticed that holding people accountable wasnít mentored. Very broad, but it is clear Washington is taking this serious. I admire the excitement from all those involved.
I really like the quote ìPush from the topî for support for CTE education. The biggest concern I saw is that we are constantly fighting the stigma that CTE is less than a 4-year degree. The use of middle skill jobs reinforces the stigma and hierarchy.
Great event and very excited to work with the state Governor and other leaders. Also, I would like to extend and expand this movement to the art, entertainment, and music.
Great high level ñ and work weíve been doing for 20 years and how do ìyouî get this in front of students. How do you prepare students as lifelong learners so when their job/career is lost to automation they are resilient and can change? Relevancy of education needs to begin in elementary school, by fifth grade at the latest.
Itís exciting to see that businesses are investing in CCL and putting their money behind their statements and projects.
Yes, a lot of employers are hesitant to hire or be engaged with students less than 18 years old, due to so much legislation. What metrics are we measuring/using for schools themselves, for putting effort in getting/helping students get jobs. Currently, there is no incentive for teacher involvement.
In our rural community we are struggling to create opportunities for students.
I appreciate the realization that not all students are headed to a 4 year degree program. This allows the culture to shift to encourage learning at all levels.
State policies will need to change. Teachers will need to be on board. Need to educate the parents.
What about core values ñ citizenship, service, leadership. Important that we share across boundaries. Geopolitical ñ People ñ schools
Importance of close collaboration and supporting rural counties of Oregon. We have more in common, and itís vital to share limited resources to achieve the very similar goals.
Makes absolute sense to prepare students for work while they are in high school and have no interest being college bound. Theyíve done this in Europe and Russia for years. Reminds me of Mike Roweís movement. maybe bring him on board to build momentum. Concerned if funds that may be essential for disabled students being diverted from the W10A. Transportation is an issue in a rural area. A skill center like the one in Vancouver would be ideal.
Ideas are inspiring, but the presentations were a bit repetitive. Deliver message ñ short, powerful, succinct, And relevant to listeners. More correlation to hand-outs in front of us.
Funding? All students?
Students hired after their training? Great about apprenticeships and paid along the with hours. Youth with disabilities. Nothing mentioned.
Need to adapt current curriculum. STEM career path not of interest to everyone. Donít exclude non STEM careers. Attracts young people to stay and engage in community growth.
Adapting. What about non-STEM? Altering established curriculum. Meeting or changing state requirements. Retain youth in our communities. Remember citizenship/leadership/core values life skills. The term middle skills or non-professional was offensive to some listeners.
Hope that the funds will reach our rural area. Not sure how this is different than what we are trying to do, but more resources would be nice.
CCL partnership participation is not optional for global growth. Need to loosen restrictions on youth program. ER needs to ask teachers what they need or envision.
Seemed to be 2 target populations: Never attended post high school or some post high school.
Seems like a powerful change. The details on how the teachers will be able to handle this need to be given great attention. Rebranding of mid-level careers is essential and a large challenge.
Industry is supported.
Great to hear that everyone is on board with CCL. How will it affect rural schools.
Work on loosening the strings to insurance with industry. Allow them to put younger students to work.
Eastern Washington is full of opportunity! Our economy and we needs to be represented. Microsoft, Boeing and Amazon do not own our state.
Iím very interested in the task force; of course, weíre interested in how rural communities will be served.
Tremendous Opportunity ñ How do we access either the process or funding that would allow smaller/rural schools to participate?
These speakers are so excited about this launch. How has this helped out local STEM programs (MCHS, CBTECH, BBCC)? How is that money going to help our local STEM?
In agreance to ìnot one size fits allî statement. Students have an array of passions some higher education other technical/training more short term education. Iím an advocator to supporting needs/interests of studentís passions. Iím joyed to witness excitement of speakers for this launch.
Many STEM ideas have ìpoppedî up recently, but we need a statewide initiative to coordinate resources and have consensus on local/regional/statewide goals. Also, need more ìindustryî participation. It canít only be educators and non-profits.
Coming from a small rural community, it is encouraging that the framework includes expansion and support for CCL access. I am wondering how we will have access to apprenticeship programs.
We need to improve partnerships with our schools and agencies that can provide support to our youth who want to attend apprenticeship programs and/or training programs.
Iím curious about the coordination of these efforts to ensure communication and equity of resources. All district or regional entities are too isolated in working toward these policies; there may be missed opportunities in terms of business/industry partnerships and/or unnecessary duplication of efforts.
Wonderful to hear that JP Morgan and Microsoft are on board with CCL! Implementing mentorship programs is so very important. Hoping that this policy will run smoothly. I really believe that our school needs to change to implement more STEM and career skills centers. Industry needs to take ownership and interest in a new and upcoming workforce. 
Exciting to know multiple sectors are interested in this development! I look forward to see how this ropes out locally and how local industry responds.
ï	How do the speakers define rural? Does all really mean all?
ï	Will support ($ís) come to districts to initiate the process?
ï	Policy Issue (Government apprenticeships start at 18 years old).
Love the idea ñ How long will it take policy makers to put it into action? Hard to place. Local business alignment. What do we do with the kids who canít make the internship?
Sounds very ambitious. My hope and concern is that the much needed opportunities are available to us in Eastern Washington and that there is sufficient communication with both industry and our public educators. Especially our school counselors to engage in CCL.
I am excited this is becoming a K-12 focus.
Policy document is helpful. The speakers were fine, but they felt a little bit like sales pitches or PR pitches for what they are point. How will what they discussed impact our workforce development initiatives?
I like this director CCL wants to go! I am concerned that college may get in the Governors for and stop this.
I believe the move from high school to work force is needed and needs to start sooner and be fluid. Local need change, grow and expand so involvement of local business. The involvement needs to be entry-level employees to upper management; this will give educators insight into real needs and gaps.
For this initiative to be successful there will need to be some fundamental system changes in our high schools.
Great policy to look forward to. Concern ñ rollout time frame seems quite short.
How to change the bias against middle-skill jobs? Should we focus exclusively on youth? What about those who didnít graduate from high school? Those who didnít attend post secondary education?
OSPI ñ Excellent vision. Focus on individual guided career planning vs college bound.
We need to be sure the legislative and OSPI move to eliminate policies that restrict the program
Overall good. Involve parents.
Iím glad that they are networking and looking at what works elsewhere in Switzerland.
How to incorporate CCL employability skills in meaningful ways in high school 21 and up? Can we make our graduates more prepared to enter specific trades or career pathways?
Very glad to read rural and disadvantaged areas acknowledged. Differences of urban solutions and rural solutions. Resources will be needed ñ need to address the challenge rural communities have because they cannot fill large class size requirements to qualify for funding.
Dedication towards making the career connected branding.
How will k-12 CTW credit limits impact the expansion of CCL and/or CTE opportunities for students?
Very important to bring this focus to rural areas, including cultural awareness of native American tribes
The government is aware there is a problem, but more must be done
It is great to see so many people involved in helping educate students into the workforce
Great policy piece. Inspirational speakers, wish more folks could see them.
Expansion of medical field programs to support the lack of RNís and MAís in rural areas at the local community colleges
Building opportunities, how to build a village. How do we connect access. We have the opportunity to leadÖworking together. Excellent forum.
Working with rural areas. How are we working together from state level.
I didnít realize Washington is doing so much for STEM programs and career connected learning, how cool! It will take a lot of commitment and hands in the pot, but together we will make it happen. All the speakers were very inspiring and I look forward to seeing this all in action.
-	I am excited about this initiative.
-	How does this funding impact the funding mandates from the McCleany decision?
Donít forget the arts and applied arts in this CCL document. These fields are heavily tech dependent and bring new dimensions to STEM thinking.
The talk of pathways and pipeline. Understanding the difference and which would be more effective in your outcome.
Reinstate the IMAGINE U Program. Use CCE resources for K-12 outreach (ìstudent ambassadors,î for example).
The skills youth need to compete for todays and their future jobs.
Donít forget to encourage growth and development of private sector economy in rural areas through less regulation and more investment in roads, infrastructure, etc. We need industry to partner with education to make this work effectively.
I found the session both informative and inspiring. I gained perspective on the big picture and the complexities and challenges within it, in regard to CCL.
-	Why focus on Military? They have tech skills via their training. Why not just certify them so those skills transfer?
-	Community college free for Washington State Residents?
I am excited for the next 1-3 years to implement the ideas.
Still absorbing.
Enjoyed the conversations. Lots of good ideas.
Great start- yes we need all stakeholders at the table ñ great ideas were shared and with passion. Only hope we donít lose the momentum started!
I think it was interesting to think about the loss of intellectual intelligence if we arenít engaging students at a young age and getting them excited about career connected learning.
How do we find and substantiate skills in our youth?
Change culture of STEM for more diversity and inclusion.
Need partnerships between business and educators.
Better tools for parents to work with kids on high school and beyond.
It would be nice to have more discussion around diversity. STEM has not been welcoming to women. Its not just about getting more diversity in students but making the industry more welcoming ñ changing the culture. College readiness is an issue, especially in Math. Need to make sure kids are prepared.
Review if Washington State apprenticeship and training council could develop a program for Hanford, would need HAMTC buy in. Discussing with WRPS HR the possibility of developing a temporary position to coordinate the program.
Excited about the conversation around non-traditional career paths ñ Chris Reykdahl/OSPI focus on the other 50% of students; Siemenís programs. The policy framework seems to lack acknowledgement or plan/training for dynamics of poverty of culture which will get in the way of successful implementations for many youths. Those providing services must consider this to be prepared for it (e.g. barriers associated with generational poverty).
Excited to hear business and industry voice in discussion of STEM education in Washington. Middle skills jobs ñnew terminology!! 
We would like to be an Eastern Washington stakeholder for Labor and Apprenticeship Awareness. This is a giant leap in the right direction for Washington!
You donít have a program that tracks mentor/mentee connections for females pursuing STEM careers. You should use WSU-TCís million women mentor- WA program co-chairs (Jillian Cadwell, jillian.cadwell@tricity.wsu.edu) to get this going. They are already in discussions with the gov office and WA STEM, but support for such a mentoring tracking program has not yet been solidified. 
How do we include parents? Money need.
Is there (found on OSPI) a list of the 70 corporations who are signed on? I believe we already have a good movement and would like to be able to push forward and be a model. I would like to attend the WBC academy for educators. WA State must include the WBC coordinators in this process.
Many speakers spoke about STEM and apprenticeships- in high schools throughout the state STEM is promoted but educators are failing to push the options of Apprenticeships. Councilors in schools need to educate the students that this option is out there for those who arenít geared for college. Apprenticeship credits should be transferred to college. 
There are a lot of interested parties in strengthening and expanding CCL. There is a sense of urgency as there are a growing number of unfilled jobs in our state. There is a disconnect between the skill set of todayís workers and the skill set required for todayís jobs.
I wish we could have heard more nuts and bolts ñ I think this is long overdue and necessary for success for our workforce.
Not impressed ñ lots of petting on backs and praising people with no substance or details.
ìMiddle skills jobsî what is the relationship with Job Corps?
What specific plans can we create for Mason County and the South Sound Region?
Naming at ìmiddle skillî implies that it is less than something else, or 2nd best. The naming may make sense for policy but does not appeal to students, educators, or industry.
They kept talking about getting employers/companies to help. I donít see this as much of a problem in my field, health information management (HIM). What I see move is attracting students to the program. HIM is fairly invisible as a career and not ìsexyî at all. The trained school level CCL, coordinators should be from industry, not academia since they better understand how the businesses work.  
-	Educators engaging directly with businesses.
-	ìMiddle Skillî wording.
That the naming needs to be addressed ñ middle skill. Technical/certificate/apprenticeship are needed to fill important society career.
Why is this being called second best?
Is this narrative changing the role of CTE in Washington State?
ìMiddle skill jobs and workforceî terminology naturally minimizes their importance and makes them sound less attractive. Why do they need to be labeled? They are skilled jobs!
Appreciate the 2 goals/commitments. Why just hearing about it? Excited for the funding. Your priorities are reflected in your budget.
Companies working together.
Middle skill?? ReallyÖ High school living wage careers.
-	Hands on real world experiences in K-12 education and higher academia are truly lading. CCL in addresses this in large part.
-	We have been doing ìone size fits allî approach to public education for too long. I see a lot of opportunity to address this issue through CCL at all levels. Re-engage kids in their education and get excited about learning again.
-	This seems very similar to what CTE has been doing for years. I am happy to see that more industry and key players are on board but how will we merge the two? 
-	Was CTE representation included in planning?
I think it is encouraging that the state is investing in CCL. But feel the focus on post-secondary credentials is ìmore of the sameî. Mentoring the Swiss-model, I think that bifurcating curricular focus between a baccalaureate track and a vocational track would take us to the vanguard of CCL.
I find it hard to believe that the organizers could not find one person of color to include amongst the dgitaries who spoke at the general session. It matters.
Great speed and concepts. L&I laws for youth.
Good ideas all around ñ whether this is going to succeed depends on significant infrastructure commitment and $$$. We need to know more on how to support OSPI, Gov, Leg to fund, support, and scale CTE in schools, curriculum changes in K-12 to reach youth and parents. Weíre ready to support a culture shift just need the guidance on how to tap.
Whereís community itself to be connections for business and education? Itís great to have great leaders but community is necessary.
Glad to see money and political leaders dedicated to this. Concerned about most of that $ going to public schools and missing many 18-25 year olds. Items on policy framework are vague ñ How are they planning to make these things happen? We have always known there things need to happen. We need to know how to make it happen.
I am happy to hear so much about career-connected learning other than college. Not all kids are interested in college.
Glad to see support for apprenticeships.
How will the money be given to different programs?
How will CCL be different or better or go above and beyond what WBL and good CTE programs already do? Why is STEM a focal point within CCL and not CTE in general? STEM is not CTE, but a lot of CTE is STEM, and CTE covers a broader range of pathways to post high school. How will CCL be implemented in to basic education?
There needs to be education for businesses
Didnít hear how all these apprenticeship opportunities are connected to K-12 education and curriculum.
Curious about policy language on supporting WBL and STEM opportunities in rural, small school districts. Many larger districts have and support CTE directors and work partners. Small rural districts do not have connection, personnel or opportunities. Please invite them in.
Two goals with policy document were especially important to me. Building connections between industry and educators and strengthening high school and beyond plan. Both of these can facilitate young students trajectory toward their careers. This is especially true in healthcare, internships, mentoring is essential to nurture students toward meaningful careers.
The policy document covers the missing links that are needed between youth and access to a meaningful career. It is great to see an option besides college being offered to those who do not see themselves in college. Exposure to careers through job shadows, internships, apprenticeships, real world experience. 
Should also address need of highly vulnerable populations like foster youth, homeless youth and youth with disabilities. 
Awesome. So excited about this work. I hope we have access to the video to show folks back at work.
I wonder what happens with that $12 million ñ does that go through OSPI to fund CCL or is this going to an outside agency (NGO) to manage? I am concerned about equity in how the $ are dispersed if it is managed by an NGO.
Excited!
Itís wonderful to hear brief statements from a variety of speakers, public and private industries.
So much talking.
Great speakers! Fantastic announcement on career connected Washington.
Opportunity Cost:  the tension between young people wanting to ìdo everythingî and having to ìchoose a careerî
Rural versus urban jobs
Tech jobs arenít all that are needed, particularly in rural areas (some speakers seemed to focus on that sector)
Teachers are trained to teach but not trained to know about general careers
Communication gaps: our community doesnít necessarily know about the CCL opportunities that already exist
How do we get the youth interested in their own lives?  How do you instill work ethic?
We need some sort of central contact point locally/regionally (coordinator) for disseminating information
Need to talk about non-traditional careers for both genders
Sources for what jobs are available
State needs to address some policy/regulation issues; an issue locally for the ag sector;  issues for convicted felons to retain certifications and they end up excluded from prior careers or career interests once released; immigration policy issues- undocumented workers/dreamers
Disincentive (losing FTEís for instance) outside of the Walla Walla Public School system (regional schools) to send students to SEATech Skills Center 
Transportation barriers
Immigration/documentation

*****
 
3.	What pressing employer and community needs can be addressed with CCL?
Partnering with CBOís such as Big Brothers/Big Sisters to train mentors on CCL. Equip those mentors with resources and toolkits. Best resources for connecting youth with diverse backgrounds that are under severed. CBOís are an untapped resource for barriers to employment for youth!
Helping staff coming into the workforce career prepared.
Through CCL students will be more ready to explore different careers and dive into adulthood prepared.
Customer Service.
Have in lower income area, increasing education will increase jobs and promotion potential and increase economic growth.
Exposing youth or adults to career options in our community.
Livable wage jobs and careers for students, especially given the projected hiring shortages in manufacturing and others due to upcoming retirement of baby boomer workforce. Done properly, students would have opportunities at all grade levels to learn about jobs and careers, explore, take CTE coursesÖ
Leadership & technological skills are essential areas to develop. Some kids from other social economic conditions or cultures need further support that their wealthier counterparts have.
Transportation to get people to the jobs. 
Fill the needs of employers- they cannot find the help they need.
Training wage for youth.
Educating youth about the building trades or other careers. Teach teachers about the trades (externships).
Educating community of opportunities, outside of college degree. Various construction trade apprenticeship programs. Information regarding pre-apprenticeship programs.
That this is a long term commitment (years)
We must have schools/CCL presenters at the table to make sure our students see the direction
Get jobs in the area.
The aging workforce is now! Diversion of youth from substance abuse, criminal justice system, negative pathways.
This needs to be viewed as a longer term commitment and partnership for the CCL programs to be successful
-	Employers can identify locally based candidates for potential hire
-	Employers can have first-hand experience and input on what students are capable of doing and what they still need to learn.
-	Students can discover locally- available careers and have direct contact with potential future employers if they are in the classroom/lab in career-connected learning environments. 
Creating better partnership between industry needs and the educational system.
How to address ìkids donít know what they donít knowî
Expand externship opportunities ìteachers donít know what they donít knowî
Younger workforce which leads to longer workers.
Better trained and skilled up workforce.
Better prepared workforce
Creating awareness
Better communication partnerships between employers, educators and communities.
Real, hands one exposure at younger levels
Access to an interested
Need for a role model I can trust.
Proved funding for community training.
Small and ordinary sized Ag and related businesses need support
Community members of all ages need to be at the table so they are in the conversation.
Bellingham/Skagit ñ pressing employer and community needs
There is a repetitive message from our business owners that they canít find skilled labor and that affects the small business owners ability to grow and create a business. Auto mechanics, body shops, plumbers, etc. are in demand and finding ways to allow kids go to these businesses at the advantage of those businesses is needed.
The construction industry in Whatcom county and western WA needs employees. These are family wage jobs that go unfilled. We hear from employers that they canít find employees with soft skills.
Workers trained with soft skills/21st century skills. Youth with plan after high school, career awareness. Tained employees.
Employer awareness that these opportunities exist. Student awareness of these programs.
Partnership with industry, soft skills, construction.
Soft skills, dependability, accountability
Arborist for city of Bellingham, police, fireman, internships
21st century skills (on-site experiences)
Better prepared workforce.
Give them skills needed for to be workforce ready
Help train students in soft skills needed to be successful
Business working with teachers to help create a vision for how schools can support community.
Literary skills, math= basic skills need to be remediated (needs to start at elementary/early introduction)
Soft skills = communication with peers, punctuality, positive attitudes
Children = money cost and lack of places to go
Transportation = lack of accessibility
Character of commerce = modernize it ñ do more to be relevant to the employers
CNSs/construction
1)	chambers of commerce are sometimes antiquated and donít have staff
2)	Youth donít engage in business
3)	Lack of awareness about STEM business in a community
We can utilize the chamber and reach out to middle and high school STEM teachers through members to sponsor lunch. Brain drain- kids leaving Whatcom because they canít get a ìgood job.î
Community needs: Education! Needs to be fully funded by government. Young people that leave school without mastering basic skills are at a greater disadvantage of finding a living wage job. I believe that CCL that is financially supported can increase the success rate of employable students.
Employer: soft skills
Exposing students earlier in their lives to learn about and become interested in careers of all kinds; fills the workforce pipeline and provides needed jobs to all youth
Whatcom CC is a National Resource Center for cyber security avocation. We have models to help cyber security progress, be developed and to support middle and high school students engagement and continue on this career path which is in dire need across all industries.
More support on higher education to include workforce partners for internships and apprenticeships.
New employees ready to work effectively on day 1. Employers build reputation as employer of choice attract top talent. Existing employees acquire/build skills confidence, leadership skills as they mentor others.
Well trained employee with appropriate soft skills.
Well trained workforce. Young adults prepared to enter the world of work.
Opening young minds to multiple options, keeping kids is school by placing equal emphasis on non-academic/ trades based learning opportunities. 
ìMiddle skillsî sounds a little demeaning. How will skill focused unions interface with this idea? 
I see a lot of educators at the table here and not a lot of businesses. Can a dictionary of willing business partners be shared.
Trades (electricians, construction) 21st century skills in the workplace- cultural issue
Local training for retraining or enhanced continued learning about new technologies in manufacturing
Clear jobs and job needs -what are the jobs exactly
Soft skills-measurement!
Company investment- work with chamber to establish tower
Like skills, soft skills, job hunting skills (resumes and networking)
Workforce ready, problem solve, connect to shovel ready opportunities.
Internships, promote diversity, start earlier in promoting/encouraging kids (talent pipeline) employment ready people
We need businesses to buy into this mentally not necessarily financially. JP Morgan talking to industry.
Nice words, would like to see specifics outcomes and goals.
Love the idea of redefining/broadening success for high school students. Love the focus on early childhood education. How will it be funded? WCC would like to work with local high school educators to help them acquire skills and access resources to establish cyber patriot teams/clubs/classes. Mentorship- WCC developed program for ECE practitioners to men for ECE student.
Language impacts ìmiddle skillsî denotes a less than skill. Use of words like talents or technical skills leave a stronger message.
Career clarity, developed through CCL is a large part of the career decision and development process. Pathway clarity is also important which includes details about educational paths, credential attainment and ongoing career growth opportunities. The CTE systems work on graded pathways may provide an opportunity for intersection and development of this components. 
The emphasis on early childhood avocation in Washington must continue. Community college can play a significant role given our ability to attract non-traditional students. Whatcom Community College is leading efforts through contracts with DEL and the state board of community and technical colleges. A center of excellence should be created at Whatcom Community College to cement this leadership. 
We need to change the term ìmiddle skillsî!!
Brilliant partnerships ñ glad they went to Switzerland and Mexico to learn how global STEM works successfully. Need to translate into solid local programs.
We must be careful with language ìmiddle skillsî can have some unintended connotations: not top skill, average, mediocre, etc ? perhaps we talk about ìtalentsî or ìskill diversity.î
Inspiring. Dislike the term ìmiddle skillsî = judgement and has a negative connotation. We like talents (top talents) technically. We all have different ìtalents.î
A lot of jobs in WA can be fulfilled through 2 year degrees. Many people donít go to CC and Technical colleges until 28 
Computer science classes are needed to increase career connected learning. Importance of apprenticeships and teacher training. Need of business and industry commitment and connections. Importance of soft skills. 6 million for CCL and 6 million for CS
It was interesting to hear what is going on especially that WA is one of 6 states in this program.
I like the momentum being generated and funded to pursue CCL. Still high level, steps to achieve results are not clear.
We need the money- initiative not much without support.
ìMiddle skillsî term should be changes to emphasis on different pathway to success through CE Technical Colleges (certified programs) I loves the new superintendents view of the needs and how k-12has evolved.
I was excited to learn that the superintendent was going to re-focus efforts on the 20% of dropouts and 30% of grads not attending college towards CCL and vocation training workforce development.
We needed something more tangible. When this passes what do we as business members do to be an active participant in this.
I encourage you to stop using the term ìwrong peopleî it creates a gap in an us vs them type of way.
Transportation to existing schools (West Sound Tech)
Local people working in their own community
Interns to replace some ìtempî positions. Robust CCL teaches youth ìhow to workî and ìhow to learnî which will be increasingly important as the speed of change ramps up year after year.
More entry level opportunities.
Educate parents, teachers, counselors on options other than 4 year college 
Large number of unfilled positions in skilled trades and CCT
Assistance for startups?
Have a workforce to fill positions vacated by retirees, develop soft skills
Getting resources where they will be necessary and partnerships to open opportunity for youth to get what they are missing to be successful in his/her career pathway
Career understanding of options and pathways, soft skills, leadership skills
Create a school district CCL committee that includes local business/community members to develop an individualized plan to work together to build a program k-12 and help support the economy locally.
Aging employees needing replaced with younger work force
Researching out to families to let them know that there are different paths for their children and align them with resources.
Outreach to families, transportation.
The relevance of high school coursework can be made more evident to our students through CCL.
Employers willing to do internships
Ability to find employers willing to take on interns and getting the information (contacts) to us in Wahkiakum Co.
Aging workforce, new companies will need construction workers for building new facilities.
Communications with families about education activities helping kids get ready to take over the retiring folks.
Need educational classes in school, soft skills and introduction to careers. Life skills are also a great focus. Learning about choices ñ drugs, legal etc can affect these as they go forward in life.
Professionalism is a must. Emphasizing the need to mentor and shape or youth not only in developing their technical skills but professional soft skills.
Skilled labor needs
Basic skills in math and communication when leaving high school
Communication needed on local job opportunities.
I work in the land development/residential construction industry. There are currently employment needs in the following related job categories: wetland and wildlife biologist, surveyors, appraisers, planners, permit technicians, civil engineers, structural engineers, landscape architects, plan designers, foresters, realters title and escrow, supporting IT. Experiences in many of these fields transfers easily between the public and private sector.
It would be great if chamber members were encouraged and/or required to create and/or participate in one or two CCL events each year as part of their membership.
Transportation to possible apprenticeships is a challenge for our very rural community.
Also having the financing available for CTE equipment teachers and programs is a challenge.
Developing toolkits for business to easily host students in job shadows, company tours, project-based learning, etc. 
Coordination.
The employers benefit from experienced and prepared students to fill positions and students are prepared for positions. We have a tremendous opportunity to develop strong opportunities to benefit youth and employers through this initiative.
CCL will be able to bridge the gap by providing more skilled and ìready-to-joinî the workforce employees
There is a need in SE Washington for private treatment facilities for addiction and individuals with mental health issues.
Perhaps we as employees can HOPE FOR possibility of kids emerging from high school with a heart, mind, and (aptitude albeit in infancy) They should have excitement upon emerging and confidence for a lucrative and production trade-craft profession.
Kids coming from HS with a better working knowledge
Applied learning in HS
Internship ---- HS to business ----  need legislation to ease the ability to do this
Transferring into to people on opportunities of careers in rural areas.
It would benefit my CTE students to feel accomplished and/or proud to be valued and looked at as such when they are learning a trade or working skills. My students do not feel ìsmartî because they donít get the praise that go along w/ the other type of class success.
Maybe a publication journal that involved the business people in the county that can share their success and struggles to expand their operation or services.
Mary Walker School District is in need of something to encourage careers, leadership, value of education.
1.	Getting a job with education training
2.	Educating students about jobs in the community
3.	Soft skills ñ come to work on time ñ work ethic.
1.	Motivation and work ethic is need in youth ñ stop teaching that college degree is necessary to succeed. It should be learning to learn
2.	Sense of community
3.	Change barriers to allow children to rail and still learn to move forward.
Poor work ethic in teens; inability for people to follow basic instruction
ï	Soft skills, customer service training
ï	basic education levels ñ math, writing
ï	more hands-on experience
ï	need more entry level jobs for youth
ï	provide opportunity to fail and learn
ï	Soft skills training
ï	Customer service training
ï	help meeting minimum qualifications
ï	mentorship
ï	internships
ï	lack of entry level jobs
Greater focus and involvement with crat/tech or apprenticeships in high school
Work ethic in teens
Inability for people to follow basic instruction
ï	Kids coming from HS with a better working knowledge
ï	Applied learning in HS
ï	InternshipsÖ HS to businessÖ need legislation to ease the ability to do this
ï	Transferring info to people on opportunities of careers in rural areas
Stronger vision and education of what is out there for opportunities.
The economy of scale is the key issue for the employer and community.
Daycare
Exemptions.
Getting youth excited about careers.
Help teach transferable skills to youth.
OSHA 10 pre-apprenticeship training through local contractor
CAN certification through local Lincoln Hospital
Reach out to legislature.
Communication between entities
Work on SEL (soft skills)
See multiple levels of careers
Changing vernacular
A growing list
A strong, talented workforce to keep our economy strong
All our trades are constantly trying to meet the demand ñ coding and tech fields
Varies with industry, but one unified message is the soft skills of managing time, adapting to workplace culture ei independence, responsibility, timeliness 
It is difficult to address the most ìpressingî needs via CCL since CCL is building up a new generation
Getting good, prepared entry employees!
Hands on and practical skills
More emphasis on building trades (construction, ship building etc)
Addressing shortages in crucial industries (ie health care)
Lack of skilled labor
Challenges from risk management
Although we here in Everett may have the opportunity to partner with local businesses in the STEM field. There are some school districts in rural areas that may not be able to partner for intern and apprenticeship programs. Allowing those districts who can to build local programs for students should be advocated for.
Needs for trained/certified workers in the STEM field
Can provide an edge for additional higher education/work opportunities
Skilled labor, IT support, soft skills
We need to focus on experiential learning for students and faculty. This can be done through internships, externships job shadowing etc. Community partnership will be critical.
Employer: need for workforce/employees that are capable of executing their job requirements and have ability to apply themselves to the greater project. (understand how they impact their co-workers)
Community: decrease apathetic adults, increase engagement, increase self worth
Creating a trained and skilled workforce pool for growing industry needs. CCL can market industry and job markets to k-12 youth and their families.
Industry needs skilled employee pool to meet upcoming growth.
Connecting students with jobs and available job markets.
Skilled labor
Employees with work skills/soft skills
Self fulfillment for youth
Reduced unemployment
Crime reduction
Skilled labor.
Soft skills.
Self-fulfillment (pursue a career not just a job)
Even though marijuana is legal in WA state employers are not willing to hire candidates who use it ñ whether it is medical marijuana or not.
Need for computer science technology, problem solving skills and knowledge, productive workers at faster rate, reduction in unemployment expense, send information to employers of process ñ the goal of CCL and what results are expected from the efforts planned.
We can provide the people with the right skills to fill in-demand positions and there can be many different avenues for success allowing for more students to find careers that they love and in which they thrive.
Having kids connected to work in an area of interest and strengths will minimize gang activity, the 10 years or so of ìdriftingî with no direction after high school, and the ravages of poverty. CCL can help relieve the pressure on kids due to testing to lessen the thoughts and acts of suicide.
Workforce gaps, shortages, idle youth, decrease dropout rates, increase graduation rates, developing soft skills
Fill the gap that is growing in skilled jobs such as manufacturing, trades, etc that will soon see a retiring work force.
The need for a future and long term skilled labor force can be impacted.
Employee shortage, skilled labor force, exposure.
One master connecting digital website, by state, by region, by city, by industry, by STEAM related programs and services for industry to get engagement.
Understanding transferrable skills to enter the work force.
Mid skill labor positions/opportunities. Manufacturing sector, increase workforce readiness.
Importance of training in ìsoft skillsî (employability skills) and social emotional skills (21 century skills) 
Liability issue for students on job sites
Develop a marketing plan to communicate our goals with employers in our local areas, young people with 21 century skills.
Teaching work ethic, employable skills social and emotional work skills collaboration. 
Real broad avenue from each high school to apprenticeships right out of high school not having to wait until you are 21.
Many parents are interested in having their kids learn coding at a young age. However, there are not many opportunities for them, especially affordable ones. Lots of people want their kids to find attractive careers, especially immigrants. Talking to the parents to change their mindsets so their kids can find something they enjoy not just the traditional careers recommended by parents.
Ways of matching up with existing programs ñ also marketing to kids. Help from counselors/schools to learn about non-university/college post high school opportunities, career connected counseling.
Reconnecting local students with businesses in their communities to learn about the jobs next door to pursue education and training in those industries.
Greater exposure to potential jobs.
Right sizing the supply of workforce with demands.
Employer: filling skills gap and remaining globally competitive
Community: economic development and sustainability, developing broader appreciation and knowledge of whatís possible and valuable.
Keeping high school students in their communities before, during, and after they get a diploma. This makes strong communities and employment.
Bigger push on experience entering the workforce sets high school graduates back a few steps; this will help address that. Gap in ìolderî industries (ie construction) reaching and recruiting younger, next generation work force.
Expanding community connections for young people keeps them engaged and motivated in positive activities.
For employers needs could be met with CCL by having more depth in new employees with skill sets coming into the workforce from high school. The community needs could be met by citizens having opportunities to get into good jobs. Thriving within their communities. Help the local economy.
Employer trends and projected vacancy and skill needs can be implemented on focus areas relayed to schools, to engage students with interests in those areas earlier. Educating the educators needs to continue/accelerate with emphasis on the k-12 administrators fully supporting both college and other training/education options.
Develop Internships as well as youth programs including tech prep.
Apprenticeships connecting K-12 grads to mid-level/mid education programs through WFD.
Address CCL to wide range of students. Same CCL model cannot be applied to all.
Accessibility for all youth, awareness of opportunities for all, and support to reach goals through various community outlets.
Mentorships, summer-out of school learning summer camps exploring CCL, system fixes/heavy lift with addressing issues in colleges and industry around the isms, and student voices in this work.
There are trade based and technical jobs individuals with disabilities can perform very well. I would like to see disability awareness training for employers and business partners, as well as staff running CCL programs.
Promote easier processes to develop and expand apprenticeships with L&I. Apprenticeship approval and formation feels more political than accessible.
We must get the word out that a 4-year university degree is not the only path to success for our students. Just because a student ìcanî go to a university right from high school doesnít mean he ìshouldî. Career education and CCL is a critical factor in helping students find their own path. 
Finish employment haps with skilled local workers.
ï	Lack of diversity amongst decision makers, management and stakeholders. Itís an age old problem that hasnít changed.
ï	Contracting opportunity for local community members to participate in educating our youth. A degree does not mean a person is better.
ï	Non-profits that are operating without a board of Directors or do not represent the community they allegedly help. We need to audit those that have been involved and eliminate those that have not acted in the best interest of the community.
ï	Communities need accepted pathways to careers ìallî students.
ï	Mentorships, apprenticeships, internships, and resources that help youth prepare and educate themselves.
ï	Support, fund and encourage non-profits and community organizations to reach and engage our youth to achieve their goals and succeed.
Changing the culture in education and to get business to the table. There were virtually no businesses represented in Pierce County ñ one employer spoke!
ï	Alternate routes to career success not obtained with a 4-year degree
ï	Soft skills
ï	Writing appropriate emails
ï	Business writing
ï	Embrace vocational training
ï	Embrace trade careers (carpentry, HVAC, electricians ect)
ï	Trade union involvement
More contact with teacher; but in a way to incentive teacher involvement.
Creating internships and apprenticeships for businesses is a challenge to resources. Helping industry to develop a road map to running a program would be vital. What does it take to start a program? What laws need to be followed? How do you engage youth successfully so that the student learns and the business benefits? What would suggested schedules be to successfully assimilate to the work environment? (remember they are used to a classroom schedule.)
ï	Providing job training
ï	Provide job opportunities 
ï	Educate schools, teachers, students, and parents.
ï	Develop a model
We need to work more with Oregon as there are few opportunities on the Washington side in Klickitat County.
ï	Job/Skill Mismatch ñ CCL can align employer needs with skill training
ï	CCL could help change the dynamic of one needs to leave to be successful. Which can improve economic development
ï	CCL could be a core focus of giving students a clear sense of future
ï	Shortage of skilled labor
ï	Address impact of federal immigration policies
ï	Employment for students with disabilities
ï	Providing employees for companies already in our communities where the housing costs are so high.
ï	Providing training and employment for students so they donít have to leave the area to find jobs
ï	Use local resources for our own communities
Employer needs:
ï	Fill positions in classic vocational tech fields like trucking, ag mechanics, welding, electrical, planning, as well as small business development
Community needs:
ï	Expanding exposure to wide scope of concern, increasing local employment, improve local economy.
Who becomes the liaison person for educators and businesses? Not all rural kids want rural jobs.
ï	No public transportation
ï	Cost of living (high)
ï	Limited housing
ï	Majority of employment opportunities in Columbia Gorge are on the Oregon side
ï	Distance between towns
ï	The communities and employers need to be surveyed on what they would like to see or have
ï	Community strength by helping workers local
ï	Employers can showcase skills needed
ï	Employers can influence skills taught
ï	Schools can gain relevancy with non-student community
ï	Students offered opportunities with guidance
ï	Structure for students 
ï	Partnering with educational institution can create connection to employees
ï	Introduce our company to schools community
ï	Develop internship/apprentice model
ï	Adapt state requirements that prohibit under 18 year olds to work in industry and develop accommodations.
A program for internships.
ï	Creating local pipeline of students ready for local jobs to solve difficulty of finding employers
ï	Improving boy education outcomes
ï	Building community support of our schools
ï	Improve skills and work with our high school grads (before 27) ER Support and mentoring and recruiting (do not wait for them to come to you)
ï	Filling the holes left from losing baby boomers with wealth and knowledge
ï	Keeping the best and brightest youth in the county/rural areas
Entry-level employees with work ethic/soft skills.
ï	Lack of opportunities for teens
ï	Lack of employees in the workforce
ï	Communication on the regional and state level of opportunities is not effective
ï	CCL could be a central source of communication
County government has needs and openings for out of high school and summer employment.
ï	Technical training
ï	Workforce experiences
ï	Educating employers and teachers in ìmiddle skillsî
ï	Placing local kids in local jobs
Job opportunities, grant possibilities, and maintaining local talent.
Soft Skills ñ Turn up, on-time, ready to work, communicate, learn, and improve.
Filling positions; changing needs of community.
Students need to show up with a good attitude ready to work.
Grand Coulee Dam, Colville Indian Reservation, Bureau of Reclamation, National Park Service. These entities can and should address CCL in many aspects of employment, job training and career employment that is available from the above group.
Industry involvement.
Develop exposure of industry to teachers, educators, institutions, and students early (middle school). Students need to become engaged, and teachers need to be educated on how what theyíre teaching related to career. Need policies to allow ìworkî at age 16 not 18. Need to have them ìearnî something. Need insurance industry to develop premiums as a safety net for companies and interns or teenage workers.
Increase in communication between local industry and schools to determine how to better satisfy needs.
Connections can be made on what are the needs of the employers? What are the resources available to connect employers and employees? Which will in turn provide the skills necessary.
Offering students more opportunities to authentically learn and practice soft skills.
Local youth can stay in their committees to work if they want to. Employers can teach and train an employee to work special jobs. 
We need to teach work ethics in the school.
Industry needs buy-in!
What everyone says about going into the schools to talk to students is great, but the schools have to take time to let it happen.
Less employees leaving jobs because they didnít know what to expect. Give young people a good idea of what to expect so thereís less of a transient workforce. Youth need to be excited about working in something they enjoy.
Gap between workforce needs and people to fill jobs. Teach work ethic ñ CBTECH Model.
Employers are in need of employers that have skills and training. We need to grow our children. Our up and coming workforce to seek these skills and our employers to if at all possible. Offer additional training/apprenticeship opportunities also. A community with a skilled workforce is able to better attract now industry, which is good for all of us.
A continuum needs to be established with the expertise throughout community and employees. So many resources ñ so many silosí.
Work ethic and pride in work.
Change high school pathways. Change work rules 16 and 17 year olds.
Job awareness ñ ONET, Worksource online can job shadow/onsite tours.
Growing demand for skilled workers in aerospace careers; employers hire employees from other states, but they frequently leave the area. ìGrowing our ownî workforce can help employers obtain the skilled workers who are from the area and are more likely to stay.
Health, technical, industries. 
Development of local economies so that there are opportunities to hire.
Tribe ñ various positions. Trades ñ constructive skills. PUD
Empty spaces being filled with employers boosting economy in the community.
The need for qualified workforce.
-Connecting employers and potential employees in chronically understaffed workplaces.
-Economic and educational enrichment for the whole community.
Finding opportunities in a rural environment
There are many employers that need employees with experience and that can be hard to find. Not every business is willing to do on hands training. There are also many people in the community that need jobs but d not have the experience or the means to gain experience.
Housing for homeless
Aligning local restaurants with schools 
Create vocational cooking classes for schools
Ensuring there is education in schools about soft skills that employers find most important. Helps with retention and student confidence.
Labor shortages and high unemployment
More small companies to employ and fill the needs of the population 
Students need to be educated on careers in their community and provide videos of what those careers look like.
Community engagement and increase youth opportunities for career connectedness. 
Loss of youth from rural areas if tech related manufacturing can move away from urban areas. Technology can allow many forms of R&D and manufacturing to be independent of urban areas. Local initiatives need to be explored and supported as to what can a community support.
Access to larger computer drives due to being rural.
Youth summer employment.
Developing hard and soft skills for potential employees.
Providing education in both soft and practical skills to create a ready workforce within all industries represented in Pacific County.
Broader communication about types of resources and how to access.
Creating hope for futures keeping youth here.
Developing skills around professionalism and soft skills. There are jobs locally for which candidates can not be found because those applying are unable to present themselves professionally or cannot succeed if hired because they lack soft skills.
Unemployment high school graduates not seeking secondary education. Unfilled jobs ñ technical skills.
Tourism industry needs with soft skills. Pacific County has high unemployment rate, yet the businesses I represent can not find healthy dependable employees.
Recruitment, expansion vs. survival and business capacity. Tuition assistance for future students.
How to apprentice when low variety and many single businesses in local area. Develop virtual reality opportunities to learn skills. Hospitals connect with others.
Early career experience to determine likes/dislikes. Open up unknown opportunities.
Finance ñ accounting specifically hospital low cost B.S. & M.S. online options. Rod tech mentoring/training program lab personal.
Increasing student interest, awareness, and understanding of local career opportunities and needs in our community and how their current educational experiences relate to those local careers. We need to align the skillset development of our students with the skill set requirements of local careers.
Skilled workers are in short demand. There is an abundance of workers but unfortunately, they are not trained or skilled which results is substandard work and cost sometimes twice as much to complete a project. This cost is usually paid for by the taxpayers. Unskilled workers earn nearly 50% less than skilled labor and do little to boost local economies. Our apprentices earn livable wages and benefits, which include full family medical insurance and pensions.
Funding to take interns. Understand the benefit for employers to have interns.
Diversity, retiring workers, increase quality of life by increasing income.
Need more women to pursue and persist in STEM- need support to connect girls and women with STEM mentors (from industry). Women hold <25% of STEM jobs. Only 15% of female high school students pursue STEM major or careers. Only 4% of female interested in pursuing STEM have a mentor. 60% of educators believe mentoring necessary to prepare students for their future. CCL can provide mentoring opportunities for females pursuing STEM careers. We need a database to track mentors/mentees in WA. Note: several companies (CBP, Walmart) pledged mentors to girls and women pursing STEM careers, but we donít have the staff, resources to engage in these efforts. We need support! Right now we are working with MWM, but this is a state level effort. Weíve pledged to sign up 1500 mentors in WA- we have about 300 in Tri-cities. There are many more mentors within the state that need help connecting with mentees, but weíre unable to make these connections without help.
Baby boomers, work ready skills.
The extreme need for skilled crafts people due to the exodus of an aging workforce, must be a priority if we want to achieve success in the next 70 years of Hanford cleanup. The employers and community are in need of skilled young people to continue to grow this state. The skilled trades are an economic asset and a national security asset to the United States of America.
Helping students and educators learn about career pathways and preparation. Learning from one another! Local needs/growth opportunities together. Connecting resources to support everyone.
Need to connect all this effort better with regular business leaders = mentoring opps, hiring needs, etc. Maybe partnership via chamber of commerce? Engaged employers. 
Less formal settings for learning experiences to increase accessibility and engagement (diploma, GED, classroom instruction).
Diverse workforce is something of concern to Washington Community and technical colleges. 
The Hanford site is losing 50% of employees to retirement in the next 5-10 years.
Employers in our community need to know how to attract youth to our area for STEM related jobs.
Need funding for apprenticeships. 
Unemployment, law
Blend soft skills learning with school programs.
ìSoftî Skills ñ how to work, how to dress
What options exist for people with disabilities?
There is a stark difference in the graduation versus those enrolled
How can we model success? Success for kids revolves around modeling success in their lives.
Child hood trauma can be difficult to account for, and we need to be able to do thisÖ
Law enforcement labor development, but the problem is that we have a labor shortage in law enforcement.
Is there a systematic way to approach business community?
Looks like transportation can be a difficult or at least an issue, particular in rural communities
How do we transport participants in these programs? Used to have some transit dollars, but those funds were rolled.
Business often donít have time, and there needs to be some relevance to the business as well as the students. 
Kids need ownership in the community. 
Problems with the rules in getting access to the jobs
Noted the scary amount of engineers being trained in the Mexico
36% students who left in high school are currently not engaged in some other after high school related activities
Problems, or fear related to teaching and meeting standards. 
Not everyone is working in the field they want.
Business community can be unnerving, and difficult to access because they are in two different worlds.
Sierra Pacific is hiring, but with even with entry level jobs, most of the local kids looking to get a job, are not even prepped to successfully interview for the SPI
The business community has their own issues. Schools need to be connected the business community and we need to have better communications.
Funding in and out - funding is not sustained and the results impacts wax and wane based on funding and community memory.
What about the kids that are barely getting back and want to go to school? Gave out scholarships, to attend a two-year college. 
Not a single request from the HS to discuss public safety. One of the major employers in the county is government.
County, jail, public safety, and there seems to be nothing in the ways of career development for high-risk offenders
Fairview resulted in the creation of young white cops, but we need a program that expands that opportunity to include other careers, using the CTE, learning academies. 
Not all tech is high tech, some tech includes NRM based science and technology. And Mason county is a strongly NRM based community and we have the opportunity to work towards. High tech NRM system?
Lack of awareness of many different career options and post secondary options. Especially for parents and educators who are influencing youth decisions.
Inviting business and industry people to do brief presentations at grade school/middle school level so kids know there are more jobs out there than just doctor, lawyer, teacher, Computer, etc. Making fewer required courses to graduate but allow more electives so students have time to take vocational training. 
-	Professionalism
-	Soft skills
-	Time management
-	Kids are more job ready
Systems are in place donít seem to be promoted correctly. Open more opportunities for exploration.
-	Entry level employees
-	Professionalism and soft skills
-	How do teachers understand the application to real world problems and how to integrate the skills into the everyday classroom?
Sacred Heart, Geo engineers. More counselors for D&A. Healthcare- structured content are so high. Feedback loop for nursing access to degree?
Showing breath of major fields of employment in Washington. Skilled entry level and intermediate employees.
-	Image
-	Middle skill (not 4-year) less than change this to ìcareerî.
High skill living wage positions need for career. Presenters for schools/clubs mentors). Elementary teachers need access to career information.
-	Soft skills for students (K-12 and post-secondary) responsibility, accountability, collaborative leadership.
-	Programs currently in place but are not getting the support/resources they need.
-	Possibly redefines counselorís role/tasks.
-	Education systems need a better balance of curriculum/credits.
-	Standardize testing content ñ re-evaluation of whatís applicable to career/life.
-	Trained skilled workers
-	Living wage jobs
-	Ability to pilot careers in the process
-	Kids who need experience the most are least likely to get it.
-	Soft skills
-	Awareness of options
De-stigmatizing blue-collar work. Emphasizing the importance of all career types to the community and economy. Increase the training and opportunities to encourage entrepreneurism and not just jobs/employment.
-	Helping students become job-ready
-	Helping job seekers become more competitive
-	Helping Employers retain good hires
-	Helping students determine their fit for a profession
-	Helping employers fill positions
21st Century Skills ñ Social/emotional learning and support
Incentive and communication
Funding.
Employer connections, skilled employees/wage. Time ñ credits and opportunity
WE have many internship opportunities but the local CCís have been difficult to deal with.
Recruiting EEís with skills, engage young people in a positive and constructive way. Letting kids know they are valuable and put them to work in their communities. Get students and parents bought in that a 4-year path isnít the only path. Soft skill development. 
Pipeline, youth engagement, economic development, lay off aversion/recovery from closure, responding to changing economic climateÖ. All of it.
Not enough businesses in rural communities for job awareness. Many students donít finish high school and arenít prepared to work.
Connections between business and learning institutions. 
More parent education ñ itís not just educating students and employers ñ you need to get parents at the table and understanding. Engage community and get middle schoolers ñ donít wait until high school. Unpaid internships donít work after high school ñ those people need to make $. Community development/rural development programs.
Skilled labor force for the trades. Economic sustainability in rural communities.
-Need for a ready workforce. 
-Outreach between employers and educational partners. 
-Sustainable funding model. 
-Supporting employers who are willing to offer opportunities on a consistent basis.
-Apply to more than youth.
Workforce training and development.
Money outreach. Supporting employment. Build consistent employer commitment. 
Raise quality of potential employees for entry-level jobs.
Ensuring that our students know what available and clear ìpacketî on how to make it work.
Soft skill development ñ paid internships ñ funding for WBL ñ coordinated. Education materials on how to hire youth.
-How business connect to K-12
Development of partners/industry in rural areas ñ collaborating with innovative partners for small business/innovative partners.
Overall labor force. Primarily blue-collar workers. The STEM program is important, we canít forget about labor jobs. Transportation issues.
We need to better match the ethnicity and language of our healthcare workers to the community they serve. CCL programs may help us to recruit a more diverse and well-matched health workforce.
Fulfilling the internship demand for healthcare careers. There is a profound misconception regarding health careers and what is essential to beginning health education. Communication is important.
Increasing the skills of our current talent pool to meet the needs of local industry and economy. Especially in construction, agriculture, and health care.
CCL can help give direction to youth who find secondary education is not for them by providing alternate routes to a career.
How do we limit how often we are ìaskingî businesses to help?
More students.
Employers need to get involved! Employers on advisory boards. There needs to be collective collaboration with education, local leadership, and employers.
Making employers aware of the programs available and get them involved.
Development of the trades, getting students interested and aware of trade jobs that pays well and are struggling due to lack of skills.
Everyone has an Iphone, yet it wasnít ever a thing 10 years ago. How can we prepare students for markets that donít yet exist?
The need for employees with tech skills.
Industry demand alignment with skills of students; Building workforce pipeline. Career awareness ñ exposure to opportunities, career preparation ñ technical and 21st century skills training.
Not enough people to fill the jobs available, either because of lack of awareness that the jobs exist or lack of needed skills (related- not enough local opportunity to have a first job) or false expectations for what a first job should be or pay 
Not enough teachers, especially for pre-k programs
High school students: not enough time to explore different local career opportunities
High school and beyond plan: 8th grade and explore careers more extensive; WWCC Guided Pathways model; working with high schools to get college materials
Disconnect with locations that need certain trades and others that donít
Place bound workers; need to connect them to nearby towns/jobs
Fear of hiring illegal immigrants/Dreamers
Having students that are trying to get into the Ag Industry with some kind of connection or background to Ag
Lack of knowledge re job benefits literacy, such as health insurance, retirement, etc.
Labor shortage
Provide the resources to fill the skills gap
Expand outreach to garner more employer participation in internships (paid & unpaid)
Increase the number of mentors coming from business and industry
Establish ìadopt a classî or a program to help underwrite costs as a sponsor
Working together with employers to offer more job shadow opportunities for veterans and older students in job transitions
High demand jobs need skilled workers. In order to attract more businesses we must provide them with a skilled worker pool. Providing educational and training opportunities for students to gain skills needed for higher paying jobs will enhance our community.
Technical skills, soft skills, focused pathways
Growing our own talent
Strengthening economy
Awareness of opportunity
Learn the needs of employers
Career awareness- promoting emerging careers and current/future occupational needs
Providing life skills and job training classes. The clients that I serve (who are looking for work) lack the basic knowledge and etiquette needed to keep a job (conflict resolution, interpersonal skills, time management, etc.). They also need mentors to turn to when facing challenges in life and work.
Bilingual, degree, serve and community oriented
Programming agriculture robots is one example. Housing construction. Electrical workers.  
Interest and career-awareness of current jobs available in the region to our youth
Workforce needs in the future for our industries can be met with local talent
Economic growth and expansion of business and industry with a skilled workforce available.
Graduating students who can meet local work force needs
Mitigating the high poverty levels in our community by connecting kids with family wage jobs
Youth apprenticeships and pathways programs
Workforce retention in the community
Employers establish intern positions and hire youth to help them learn the business and help them decide their career path.
Employers need access to skill employees and people need options for work. There are so few jobs in rural communities that it is exceptionally hard to become employed with or without skills.
Retaining local talent
CCL can produce responsible, confident and knowledgeable employees
How to connect with other areas like Omak and Okanogan
How are special needs students able to access CCL?
Prepping kids for the work world, helping educators understand what employers need out of these kids





*****


4.	What do you need to start or expand your local CCL efforts?
Aberdeen ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Expand access to apprenticeship and other short term training programs.
Align those short term training program with employer needs.
Employers will need to have as much say in education and training as educators.
Support for the community from our internal leadership. Externships and job shadowing structure, cleared definitions of what is required of businesses to support the program. 
Work with local schools to consider internships. Speak with local schools to encourage education and job readiness.

Auburn ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
More public private partnerships
-	Schools + employers (K-12) and funding for schools to partner with employers as Grad Academy does
-	Higher education -similar public/private partnerships
Money, policies that support and engage small and diverse owned businesses, programs that support mentorships and internships, employment security, DOR, can subsidize compensation or match.
Auburn has been on this course for past 20 years. Could contribute information to other cities
Work ethics, worker traits, need to be taught.
Interested students.
Cooperation from school district superintendent and school board along with support of districts elected officials.
Opportunities to educate on different apprenticeship training and programs on construction.
We have strong CTE programs in Auburn, we need the spotlight on ìthis is a great option/directionî for students
The focus has been on ìonly collegeî counts that career connected or career ready was looked at as less than, We all understand it isnít but we need louder voices and more press on successes.
Money to enhance and expand current k-12 CTE programs.
More info on community education needs.
Local support to help raise employer awareness about CCL efforts and their benefits.
Administrative support to help manage and scale existing career connected learning efforts as they are intensive for teachers and businesses to manage successfully (communication, coordination, agreements, continuity, etc)
Recognition/awareness that there are alternative hiring/talent pipelines other than just ìbrand nameî university programs.
Access to industry, we are a rural community with limited resources.
Additional information regarding externships for teachers and/or extend to parents.
Partnerships with bigger schools to provide more educational opportunities- taking classes via webinars etc.
Mentorships
Train the trainers.
Better community/relationships, communication and partnerships
Inclusion and diversity.
Hands on real-life experience
More skilling up.
More support training for small businesses.
Similar to above -partnerships!! To give students opportunities at all levels, real, hands one exposure at younger levels.
A survey from governors office or higher, similar to find out who is willing to partner and share that list!!!!
A stable home so I can be safe and sleep regularly also so my son can come and be with me when he can.
Funding to build/expand efforts.



Bellingham/Skagit ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Get the CTC system in k-12 to assist with developing academic pathway clarity to support the CCL objectives for individuals. Map and attack k-12 and CTC CCL opportunities.
Develop and design around CCL needs for transfer students and connect these needs with local (and distance) employers.
Bring mentorship into the conversation around internship and service learning programs
Improves partnership for internships to on the job training sequences ñ look for opportunities where CTC can offer CCL to k-12 programs directly.
Greater industry participation and support for staff to facilitate linkages between students and job shadow or internships opportunities. More support for industry personnel to teach STEM subjects in particular it is very difficult to attract faculty given wage disparities. 
Childcare. Transportation (especially in rural areas).
Start a business education skills training (BEST) through the training. I work with Tim Frye to develop an app that shows STEM local employers that could be used for middle school, high school and under employed, unemployed 18-28 year olds!!
Employers need to see how investing in those efforts has a direct benefit to their business and more immediate benefit.
Increase volunteers at Whatcom literacy council for adults.
Increase classes and instruction ñ reading and math coaches at elementary level
Employers priority transportation ñ soft skills in the schools work in terms, teach kids how to work together
Create full time career center to help coordinate industry ties
Commitment from local business/industry
Staffing and resources that work in the k-12 system: transportation, schedules, opportunities. Money. Purposeful coordination.
Money, transportation issues. Less sites in higher education. More connection with departments and institutions. 
A plan sharing, best practices. Money to start.
Money: programs, trainers, equipment. We can build partnerships and innovate just have trouble executing. Across transportation etc. 
Communications- awareness pieces for employers their chambers of trade associations
Mentors to engage students the specific pathways and options
Our superintendent monthly meeting and awareness and progress discussion.
Partnerships/communication and coordination.
Businesses willing to invest in students (tours, presentations, class visits)
Business sponsor liaison to act as single point of contact
Consortium amongst local schools, community college.
Create a ìchamber of commerceî program to recruit employer to speak at local middle and high schools. Develop a list of school contacts to offer speakers.
Information on how to connect our business members to these opportunities with students and vice versa. Cross collaborative efforts- schools, business and community. Know what is already available. The state needs to make sure they communicate this as best as possible to everyone.
Communication via a top down method. Be sure to engage businesses as well. In order for this to succeed you must engage with students and get them excited about the process. Consider a newsletter that keeps everyone who attended these seminars in the loop on the progress of CCL moving forward.
Need a lot more industry participation. Look outside of the regular players. Messaging, campaign, outreach.
Increase internships, increase apprenticeships, communication, we are basically a CCL program
Expanded internship opportunities WBL apprenticeships ñ employer participation.
Develop partners. Businesses that support employees serving as volunteers in the program. Opening opportunities for youth to develop interests.
Money
Trained professionals to train
Facilities
Current k-12 regulations restrict schedule flexibility
Transportation
Industry engagement
Regional inventory of current projects.
Network connections. Building points of contact for educators to find ways to help students with ìthe real world.î
Connections/coordination between education and industry. Connect with chambers
Purposeful coordination. Paid summer internships.
Businesses who are willing to bring in youngsters and spend time and energy with them.
Youngsters who know what they are good at or passionate about.
Get youngsters out of learned helplessness.
Inventory of opportunities. Money. Clarity or ways to achieve goals. Gaps to address ? research examples of success use same language.
To continue to rebuild relationships with local community colleges and work forces.

Bremerton ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
More Resources
Resources
More local advisory participation, define business participants role.
Funding that is sustainable
More employers willing to host paid or unpaid interns/ job shadows/mentoring/externships
Businesses tend to assume itís too much trouble or costly (in time or money) to host, but they often pay for temporary staffing services for jobs that could be done by intern/work based learning/work study students.
A plan to implement locally.
Money
True employer training, government partnership, no silos, no forbidden territory

Cathlamet ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Central point for activities that organize actions are providing. Attracting more students to attend career activities.
Ways to overcome barriers with employers to promote with marketable materials to sell the opportunity for them to open up to apprenticeship opportunities. Example: Toutle as has grant to pay for transportation and purchase any equipment kids would need to do job shadowing but still they canít get businesses to support this opportunity given no time and other barriers such as local credit unions saying canít serve in bank with confidential information and money based on policies. Need to find ways to overcome those barriers.
One stop/location to post events and communicate.
Expand partnerships and cell activities
Labor to advisory committee at k12 and college. 
Know how to continue the conversation and network with resources.
Recognition that there are many unions, associations beyond building trades and longshore man, reach out and assess needs and relay to employers/businesses.
Clearing house to connect employer with employees (or potential employees).
Recognize my own biases and work through it.
Funding to help with coordination, career counselors and CTE teachers. A willingness from local businesses to mentor, students especially our ìtoughestî students.
Contacts willing to work with students in Wahkiakum county from other counties.
More businesses to realize they need to get involved in training their next employees.
Communication of events, communications between employers and schools.
Website: boots on the ground, shared resources.
Use my staff resources to meet with employers and educate and get job shadows. Use training opportunities.
A designated networking site that would allow for collaborative efforts as well as keeping everyone in the loop.
More interaction with folks with opportunities. Tie in with schools to coordinate retiree mentoring opportunities. Exposure of successful work ethics for student understanding.
The ability to receive high school credit for ìexperiential learningî ie structured internships, apprenticeships, and technical certifications. 
Funding to support small school travel or PTE benefits to community learning centers. Example: small school A canít offer a welding class but has interested students. Medium school B has a program but is 30 minutes away. If funding and transportation wasnít a barrier all students could benefit. 
More opportunities for youth to experience employment.
Communication with key ìplayersî educators, business, local government. 
More flexibility to create credit bearing programs that lead to graduation.
Make classroom work relevant to the real world by allowing more experiential projects to happen.
More information: get our efforts coordinated do this together.
In education, the mandated graduation requirements are a barrier to developing opportunities for students. Unfortunately, these high standards make it challenging for students to participate in flexible opportunities of CCL when our youth donít have flexibility in meeting graduation and state testing standards it is challenging to give them these opportunities.

Clarkston ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Walla Walla Community College is leading the way by creating classes and programs to address the needs of the local community workforce. As an example, the jet boat building business is growing and WWCC is starting a new program in Aluminum Welding to meet this need.

Colville ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Open invitation and integration into school curriculum. This could come in the form of work/trade shows 9-12, trade specific math, language introduced via forum allowing or rather paring interested jobs withÖ us.
Make programs in school that can connect kids to industry which might not be a college degree.
ï	Mentorship to see a future outside poverty for some
ï	Vocational training program modeled after Spokane Skill Center of Hsigh school students
ï	Training and/or mentoring youth wage for those under 18 ñ not minimum wage
ï	Mentorship between school/business
ï	Communication between invested/interested groups
Youth programming ñ hard to recruit! But incredibly important
ï	Communication/connection between businesses and school districts
ï	Remove/alleviate the red tape
ï	Local control on education
ï	Businesses be able to teach at high schools
ï	Be able to job shadow
Connect with schools
ï	Skills center locally
ï	Local control of education
ï	Training wage programs for employers
ï	Programs to allow for failure
ï	Mentorship program ñ job shadowing
ï	Vocational counselors in schools
ï	Focus on true work experience
CTE in schools is counted as more than an elective credit, this should be required. Easier to cross credit.
Perhaps a hands on learning facility that involves a real product and/or services that are relevant to local needs.
ï	Employer on-boarding
ï	Let students know what jobs are out there ñ what do they entail?
ï	Job shadow
ï	Allow waivers to employ youth without risk. Insurance requirements and liability are stopping
ï	Need for longer school day to allow students to be mentored by employers/employees/elected officials/others

Davenport ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Facetime
Awareness
Knowledge
Small business connection tool kit.
Lighthouse district ñ business partnerships.
Quarterly meetings with school districts and EDC.
Money.
Funding
Send money to Davenport school district ??

Everett ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Lose the term ìmiddle skilledî
Liability relief (L & L)
Access to local businesses
Student ìwant toî
Support from the General manager and Board of Commissioners to allow staff to be mentors to students.
Continue collaboration with advocates, policy advocates and existing programs.
Get employers interested
Rules allow under 18 to be in work force
Skills centers/ CTE in each district
Better resources made available so that high school kids know the opportunities and jobs available in their future
Make senior projects relevant by removing barriers to job shadowing that are age- related
More CTE skill centers so that kids donít have to travel so far
Employer partnerships
Resources/time to develop on even more robust training program
State direction and expectation that this take place
What isnít measured in schools is not required and implemented in schools
Eliminate state testing as a graduation requirement. Fee schools up to allow students to remain in CCL classes which spark them passion and interest.
Reduce Core 24 to Core 19 or 21 to allow time for credit based internships/ apprenticeships
For rural schools online/skype internships Art virtual reality programs 
Buy in at all levels of education, business and government
Support of our schools and businesses
Continue on our current course
The challenges that prevent these programs need to be discussed ie anything surrounding risk management, liabilities, insurance needs to be discussed so that challenges can be reduced. Coordination between businesses and schools needs to be expanded. Is it possible to increase CCL /internships/project based learning via internet/skype focus?
Funding and support from school officials
Partnerships with local organizations and companies
Access to informational material
Forum for continued collaboration with partners: how do we get connected to do presentations, career fairs, etc?
Washingtonís policy framework on career connected learning mostly increases access to training and resources. Asking students for their input.
We need commitments from businesses and community leaders to prioritize bringing high school students and young people into the fold. School Districts can provide all the resources they want with no avail unless business leaders commit to helping students with potentially less experience. Also start before high school with awareness.
Increased CTE funding ñ funding and legislative options for apprenticeship
Strong public/private partnership 
Appropriate exposure for children.
Local business relationships with corporate approval. Training facilities with equipment.
Better communication with schools, more support from schools, funding for CCL at the schools.
Consistent way for business and schools to connect.
Student input ñ what do they need? What our their perceptions?
Money/budget
Support/buy-in from key stake-holders
Adequately trained staff
Needs assessment/feasibility study of what students (youth) want/value from a CCL
Have to communicate the goals of CCL (paper, social media, etc) 
Be kept current of activities of lessons learned and positive results of CCL efforts
Enlist support from a number of varied industry groups
Do a needs assessment of students so they will be part of the solution.
Connections with local schools.
Connections with industry
Long term internships with students
College credit for internships
Structure of internships
More connection with employers/CC/Unis/tech centers to know what skill sets are needed. What programs are needed in the present and near future and develop more opportunities with employers for on the job training and internships.
Participate at CTE level
Building community partnerships, dedicated front line staff, mentorships, internships, job shadowing
1)	We are interested in signing up school districts to sign up with us (contract for services ñ Institute of Flight)
2)	Introduction to aerospace industry: 90 minute tours
3)	Donors for financial assistance in order to create access to our education program
4)	Working teacher advisory board $75 credit, meet quarterly ñ provide hands on assessment to curriculum
5)	Help sharing opportunities with us, how to get the word out.
NA ñ but as business solutions we can connect business to education for input and direction perhaps leveraging funding for future job candidates ñ it is not middle skills ñ itís credentials!
Culture shift ñ redefine success with staff, parents, students. Campaign ìgo and doî ìtry it outî ìtry and tradeî ìreal worldî
Community Connections ñ partner with business, create template
Communication ñ target grade levels, parent nights, empower!
Clear access to opportunities.
Challenge ñ inspire, share, competition, highlight success.
Partnerships ñ opportunities to experience real world jobs. Awareness shift in focus, beyond credit completion to launching.
Set up mentorships (models of appropriate behaviors/employability skills)
Student and program success seems to be centered around finding their ìpassionî ñ let us help students figure that out.
Allow students opportunities for getting exposed to industries in the area. Provide students with a model of what 21 century skills look like. Bring in lower level employees along with the upper level employees. No more 24 credits!! More choices for students, bring in alumni as well.
More partnerships client business.
CCL training for academic counselors (high school)
Need to expand attractiveness of CCL to parents who might not support it or know of it.
District level person to coordinate with schools and local businesses to put students and opportunities together.
Create a work based learning (internship/volunteer) team to streamline information.
Identify at our community libraries those with regular ongoing programs to interface with teens
ID their educational programs/efforts and what industries those programs relate to.
ID local businesses to come in and talk to those kids as they are doing those programs and offer internships or apprenticeships
Funding to support schools to develop, implement and sustain this movement. Fun.ding should go to WBL/CCL via CTE.
As an elected city council member what municipal policy decisions can support and reinforce CCL. Municipalities often hire summer or seasonal workforce, not a focus on internships what are models of success that can support CCL
Infrastructure and staffing resources to support mentoring and apprenticeship models for internships, capstones and community based/ project based learning opportunities
Paid support for students to participate in experiences, especially for URMs
Credit hours that transfer and articulate with higher education ? requires attention to intellectual piece too
Continue to work with high school students on what is possible to them. Encourage and help them make a high school and beyond plan that works for them and help keep them on track and give continual support.
Formalized partnerships with employers willing to open internships/work experience to high school kids
Incentives for at risk youth to remain connected with school despite having bigger survival issues.
Transportation solutions across the county for students to access programs safely and reliably.
CCL taking place of counting for other credit requirements instead of on top of current high work load.
More partnerships within health sciences that can offer presentations within the classroom or internship/apprenticeship opportunities, along with field trip possibilities to research facilities etc
Networking and connections with both educators and employers. Helping to relay options to those who directly work with our youth, and assure that students are hearing and seeing all future career and training options as they near graduation. In fact, early intervention with youth educators. My own position is not in that realm, but I would be glad to volunteer, be involved in committees.

Lakewood ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Funding, and partnerships with employers.
Outreach to K-12 schools. How to make a great impact on the younger generation. 4 year is not for everyone.
More conversations with middle and high schools.
More communication/collaboration with community resource/providers.
More opportunities for communication and funding for innovative programming.
I hope to partner with more departments in OSPI related to CCL, as well as with other agencies as part of the Washington state rehabilitation councils.
Decrease the competition between high schools and colleges over FTES. It will always prevent innovation and partnering between colleges and K-12.
We need more business and industry contacts and designated time to spend with them discussing these topics (we call this CTE advisory but often have limited success recruiting and retaining members).
Commitment and connections with employers as well as a stronger connection between K-12 and higher education.
ï	Funding for small businesses that are actually in the community.
ï	Constructive and appreciative feedback from public entities, minus the ìIím certified with the state so my way is rightî mindset.
ï	Assistance with building a true pipeline between policy makers, the school system, mentors, and the students weíre trying to reach.
ï	To be added to any relevant newsletters or mailing list that will connect me with people/organizations that are trying to innovate/revolutionize our thought process.
1)	Mentors. People to work with students to point them to pathways that will bring them success.
2)	Industry connections ñ paid internships.
Resources, funds, personnel and commitment from our city government and state agencies.
Business involvement and get educators/teachers working in companies over the summer or for a year to get business people into the classroom. Make connections across all sectors. But thus needs to be a high profile initiative embraced with a phrase as common as ìa chicken in every potî a career for every Washingtonian.

Lyle ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
ï	Local employer buy in and support 
ï	Removal of stigma of OSTís or apprenticeships (they have a bit of a bad name in some communities) 
ï	Parent buy-in support
More communication with teachers and industry. Provide a consistent forum for each to engage the other.
We need space and time in our studentís school schedules to access programs.
Again more detailed structure to handle an expanded internship program. Make funds available to rural schools to participate in field trips.
Communication. Come up with a plan through community leaders, funding, staff, and volunteers.
Transportation!
1.	Resources ñ people and money
2.	Define participants and expectations
3.	Develop thoughtful planning activity
4.	Building networks and bridges together
5.	Connect with family and friends
6.	Leverage social networking
7.	Legal protection for businesses and industry
ï	Funding
ï	Build on exporting qualities
ï	Bi-state coordination needed
ï	Communication to keep everyone on the same page
ï	Need to address/align regional transportation.
ï	Transportation
ï	Kids who are willing to work check with them about the programs they want
ï	Location, location, location!
ï	Employers willing to employ outside the bay
ï	Coordinate with DVR ( Emilie Ruehs ñ Transition Specialist / DVR / Vancouver
ï	Improved internet
ï	Trained teachers
ï	Communication about what efforts are already underway and tie-in more
ï	Mobile programs that can address rural sites across wide geographic area
ï	Identify point agency for info
Better infrastructure, transportation, what funding, additional funding call will be needed. CCL in Seattle is not the same as CCL in Yakima but similarities should exist.
ï	Need to survey employers/communities
ï	Teachers in the school need to be more involved and asked what their needs are
ï	Increased partnership between Oregon and Washington
ï	Communication ñ who does what?
ï	Parent / student engagement 
ï	What does local industry want?
ï	Transportation around region
ï	Deliver network to the schools
ï	Development of programs for students apprenticeships
ï	Plan do check act
ï	How can we meet some state curriculum and create interest toward the employer
ï	Better communication (point of information CCL)
ï	Involve employers and teachers
ï	Career fairs 
ï	Short presentation in every area
ï	Transportation
Staff time to connect business and education ñ maybe an organization like Wenatchee Learns.
ï	Make it a priority
ï	Inspiration from CCL groups (STEM etc) to leadership
ï	Get info shared
ï	Voc equipment needs economic development support and funding
ï	Transportation
Effective communication between schools and employers and employees and students.
ï	Funding for expanding rural public transportation and transportation to get teens to work
ï	Guidance on how mentorship training will be provided
ï	The screenings and training alone will greatly increase work load for schools
ï	Mitigating risks for youth working with adults
ï	Need to know what is being done
ï	Need to know what is need to fill
ï	Better understanding of how to start
ï	Connect businesses and teachers
ï	Communicate about existing bi-state efforts
ï	Compiling relevant information to kids and teachers
ï	Creating a community 

Moses Lake ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Industry connections with industry that wants to work with our internship program and us.
-	Tax breaks for industry that works with education and schools.
-	CCL task force? What is the next step?
Worksite coordinator.
Make contact/exposure with industry; change labor laws and liability issues for getting kids on-site; change attendance laws.
-	Connect industry to the classroom
-	Regulation limits what our kids can be exposed to
-	Minimum wage is limiting if not eliminating our youth the opportunity to learn a work ethic and experience
Who are the responsible parties for CCL workforce? How do we access the people or process for CCL? What is funding for GCDSD to participate ñ public, private, ect?
Connect industries with youth.
Industry contacts ñ teachers/schools > students. Students as workers or interns (insurance back up).
Would like to be able to see and observe similar districts that have experienced success in this area. Training for staff related to CCL efforts. Appropriate funding and resources. Ability for kids to gain meaningful experiences prior to turning 18.
Better communication with schools and colleges. Change the work ethics of our youth.
Our district is working to develop community and business partners, so we need to identify these groups more and we need more ideas for how to use them in ways that go beyond a single visit. Can we get a copy of the CBTECH industry partner list?
Workforce Career days at Jr. high and high schools. Work ethics!
Money! Partnerships with accessible certification programs.
ï	Resources
ï	Policy changes
Nothing ñ our advisory boards do that. Each teacher makes the connection.
Communication to all that can play a role in this so important issue as well as a true understanding of the benefits this has for our communities and most importantly, our youth. This includes our smaller and more rural areas around larger communities. Our youth (under 18) need more work/real world opportunity.
Allow youth to work! Most employers cannot even allow someone under 18 to tour their facility. Pay trade experts to do workshops. Hands on projects in school ñ talk about pathways in their trade rotate through all schools.
Time and money! We want industry to doÖ We want education to doÖ All need the support of people and funding ìto doî effectively. Everyoneís jobís are full. Itís not us to assume more can be added to their plates.
A communication effort to help local community with work based learning students. Take time to start not working more! To have an understanding of what we can do! Asked how can I?
Industry involvement and a model to follow. Lower age for work involvement.
Work site learning coordinator.
Industry leaders who participate teachers, students, and families.
Closer relationships with employers to develop and/or maintain relevant education/training programs. Employers willing to invest in education locally are investing in their own future. Donations of expensive equipment, supplies, peopleís expertise can enrich local education programming. As the state continues to disinvest in public higher education, we are less able to meet existing and emerging workforce needs.

Okanogan ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Every industry / K-12 / Higher Education
ï	Need to develop formal partnerships
ï	Develop strategic plan
ï	Invest in future projects
ï	Infuse pipeline (K-12) curriculum 
ï	Develop a regional cooperative to deliver programs to students
ï	Policy and supporting budget allocators to fund programs
ï	Work with entities to expand and encourage economic development
Series of meetings ñ include school officials
We need teachers willing to teach a class. That is hands on and connect with local professionals life the construction district or forest service land trust, and get kids connected with them learning about the opportunities in these fields.
Volunteers and money.
Apprenticeship/mentorship models.
-Consistent funding ñ salary, equipment, program development, and expansion.
-Buy-in from employers
-Curriculum development
-Community awareness
-Expanded facilities for workplace experiences
1)	Legislative support to allow schools to be creative and try new programs and will be receptive to increase funding for successful programs.
2)	Need support for a skill center.
3)	Need to look at restrictions and costs of hiring or hosting interns under 18.
4)	Rural areas need to fund drivers ed ñ public transportation is not the same as rural.

Port Angeles ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Funding
This is my first introduction to CCL so I personally have some further research to look into
A veterinary technician and assistant program at PC
The lower Elwha Klallam Tribal Vocational Rehab. Program needs a clear understanding of our ability to work with youth and transition services. 
Collaboration ñ everyone on the same page
Funding and targeted graduates
More grant opportunities for partnering with employers
Support the initiative and vision of the youth as they plan their entrance into the work force

Pullman ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Funding.
Private connections.
Support for STEM types of training and education for design related fields. Support for internships with tech heavy design firms. Support for R&D in how design fields can apply robotics in the construction industry.
Funds to create accessibility and to educate.

Raymond ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Time to get my work under control and off my plate so I can add more.
Define a group to lead county/community efforts. Make information more readily accessible, through marketing and social media. Buy-in from schools and government agencies.
We need more funding to expand our existing program and develop a new one.
Community relationships in WDC, Worksource, Chambers, and Trade Unions.
Funding, methods, and manpower.
Better connections with business sectors and educational sectors.
More information for all parties! Employers and Unions available. Certification requirements. Conduit to deliver information to all parties. 
Increased awareness. Respect for the tourism industry. More interface between education and business.

Republic ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Tuition assistance for students and my school can become accredited and receive the IV funds for financial aid.
Money and connection
Bring the community together; well though out plan, and more money.
A central multi-use center with dorms, labs, classrooms, and amphitheater. Feasibility study for extremely rural communities with complex, compound community and economic challenges.
Regulators help other larger hospital support to develop programs.

Richland ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Connections. Contacts. An agency database: name, contact person, info and what they offer/opportunities. An opportunity for sustainable networking over time (quarterly or annual meetings.)
We need the Governor to make mentoring females pursuing STEM careers a priority. We need a way to track mentors and menteer (eg ERDC). We need to partner with existing programs/orgs (eg WA STEM). Gov could send letter of support to WA industry/businesses to encourage STEM mentors to commit to mentoring 20 hours/years. This aligns with current framework: strengthening high school and beyond program ñ build stronger mentorship program.
I need to connect with the right people and leadership to help put together career connected activities and events. Central list of partners/contacts involved in CCL
Opportunities to come together ñ educators, business, worksource, etc.
Centralized information source that shows what is already in place to avoid duplication, increase utilization, and reveal gaps/needs.
Funding.
Service delivery coordination.
Making sure that folks in the room today can stay connected to figure out how to best work together/leverage expertise
We must urge the use of local contractors and local workers, enrolled in a state accredited apprenticeship program. Doing this will ensure the needed numbers of job openings which will allow private sector unions to properly grow our apprenticeship numbers.
List of willing partners
More funding.
Opportunities to collaborate.
More contacts ñ events like this are so helpful!!!!
More support and the adoption of apprenticeship utilization. We have large numbers of apprenticeship applicants every year but can only accept a percentage of those applicants due to the low demand for them. With the baby boomers leaving the workforce is only makes sense to put into place provisions that ensure the younger generations are trained and ready to fill those vacancies.
Strong connections between schools and industry. Teachers collaborate with industry professionals to develop STEM projects incorporating relevant activities for required content knowledge and skills.

Ritzville ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Communication with schools
Allowing nonunion instruction from community/industry based trainings
I would love to be a mentor and/or provide learning experiences for kids who are ready to learn.
School board approval

Shelton ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
We also need to include parents and others to be included
How do we address the need to resolve the issues related to broken family and addiction issues?
Teacher the teacher program in Spokane. Our business and assets donít always match and connect, we need our teachers to be able to provide a more tailors education geared to preparing kids for accessing jobs. This includes interview prep, andÖ
Expand to include government services (etc. public safety) to be other labor options of r kids entering the workforce
What is the role of historical programs like Job Corp? Maybe we need something like that in our community.
Plan to expand existing career programs in the k-6, to include k-8, this would include the CTE and academies. 
How do we tie everything together?
Better communication, more coordinated care, take it out of the comfort zone
We need to all be working together? Tracking data, and reflections
We need to get people connected, please send out the contact information to the attendants.
At Decca, the students are professional, confident and have a different way they come in. They start with low self-esteem, and by going through the program the kids have the opportunity to develop sense of purpose.
Sharing information with each other; Teacher training; Willingness to interface with the business community
For our kids we needs an integrated approach that considers their needs, interests and challenges.
We need to bring the county people together to list those business and ensure that you are not actively engaging in upsetting competitors

Spokane ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
1)	Toolkit for implementation in K-12 settings. Curriculum, contacts, examples for CCL activities related to specific grade levels and content areas. Addressing concern of not enough time/interest for teachers to create CCL concepts without examples/tools
2)	Time/money/support for teacher externship job shadows, ect. Allow time to learn more about careers, post secondary options and share into back with peers.
Teacher externships so teachers better understands the industry.
Need to have teachers out in the industry. Business leaders mentoring educators.
Simple ìtool kitî to integrate career options in K-5 education.
Utilize current websites that are available awareness.
-	Willingness to come to the table. Advisory committees, internships, WBL opportunities.
-	Data system that interconnected between K-12 thorough post-secondary.
-	Integrating better understanding of real world application into the teacher prep programs.
-	Teacher prep program
-	Industry and match opportunities to entrust.
Business partnership since we are rural. Most efforts by agencies to connect students to businesses through internships are directed towards city school districts. Tool kit for educators. PD for general education teachers. State teacher prep programs need to prepare teachers for CCL.
Data tracking ability K-20 plus workforce. Group/team projects for teachers. Use access to experience platform expand it.
-	Employers willing to come into schools. Job shadows.
-	Hire young employers for entry level.
Business outreach.
-	HIPPA Laws
-	Filling this with CORE 24 
-	A coalition of the willing
-	A clear sense of the need
-	Publicity (people need to know)

Tenino ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
-Assessment of job growth in ag fields
-Engagement with employer community
-Employer/industry buy-in among farmers and forestry
*Support by taking apprentices and funding education
Hire-a-youth platform. School structure that supports apprenticeships. 7th period = internships
Need to know where to go to tap into the resources. The red tape many of these programs make it difficult for businesses to actually participate. Making it easier for employers to get into the classroom and to hire students into short-term jobs for possible future long-term jobs.
-Tool kit for employers/partners on how to implement apprenticeship
-How to muddle through government
-Funding!
-Legality of working with youth
Expand awareness using local free resources like libraries.
Transportation. Lack of local employers/Commerce.
Donít expect one experience/internship to be the only thing that shapes a student ñ itís an accumulation. Expand awareness of library resources and opportunities ñ we can help with parent awareness.
Events and experiences for cumulative effect parent awareness and education. Use of free resources such as library system. Hands on learning fairs.
Employer commitment to ongoing opportunities. Staffing.
Better connection between apprenticeship, schools, and businesses.
Networking, united, and funding.
Knowledge of supports, opportunities, and people who can help.
-Funding
-Find out whatís working now and build on ñ this is not new
-Find transportation choices to allow people to get to opportunities
-Figure out the wages i.e. training wage in a way that doesnít lower wage scale for full time work
-How to let students know they are ìwelcomeî in a workplace v.s. subtle signs that chill that
Business engagement and training surrounding hiring youth.
L&I 18 year-old limit. Business and K-12 identify opportunities on how to connect.
Who are the people that will do the connecting work? 
Meet partners, strategic planning.
Exposure to CCL offer input to the need at the rural counties labor force.

Union Gap ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Partnership with healthcare employers to create opportunities for youth apprenticeships. There are growing barriers in healthcare facilities ñ strict on boarding requirements, ect.
Space or more places for kids to go after school who arenít involved in sports or ONLY afterschool 1 hour clubs. Have them get more resources to connect them to jobs to get them to do more around the community and to keep them away from bad places (high school youth). I agree kids/teens donít have enough to do whether itís after school or maybe just at home, if there were more things to do kids wouldnít want/tempted to do the bad things (high school youth)
Proper political/policy emphasis and direction with support. Focus on higher education (esp. 4 year degree) for prospective high school students. Far too much attention is given to vocational/technical and community college and the same attention/support should be given to 4-year degree colleges/universities.
More business involvement to be in the conversation and be more aligned to their needs. Also, mentors from private LOCAL employers to give youth experience in different trades and advice on how to achieve ìcareer successî.
In more rural areas there is a need for more job shadowing/internship places. There also needs to be more routes for individuals with a criminal background to get a job. Many youth leave foster care with a record.

Vancouver ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Expanding the definition of STEM or making sure we are ìall inclusiveî so that we arenít alienating businesses and other potential partners.
Increased employer engagement ñ specifically the ability to provide capacity for internships. We need increased state guidance around the proposed funds to enhance partnership. We need more outlets of sharing expertise across the region.
Be more engaged with local educators.
Community connections.
Resources to support employer engagement and school district to expand CCL/work based learning experiences.

Walla Walla ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
We need a thorough inventory of what CCL opportunities exist so we can both promote them more broadly plus also then identify what gaps/needs exist
Hire a local/regional coordinator to help lead the effort to inventory and then communicate opportunities
More businesses need to offer job shadowing as  
Expand WWCCís Try a Trade event to in-service week; invite and target area K-12 teachers so they can better understand how what they teach relates to career opportunities
Help academic advisors connect with industry partners
Introduce youth to new experiences that allow them to learn to adapt to new circumstances and possibly discover new interests 
Job shadowing at a younger age
Practicing interviewing skills at a younger age
Awareness about careers pathways that adults take are not typically linear
Education about quality of life (location based)
Nontraditional careers for both genders
Ask the Chamber of Commerce to give awards/provide recognition for businesses that are putting effort back into the community by offering job shadowing, internships, or apprenticeships
Junior Achievement: make it a part of the school curriculum

Wenatchee ñ whatís needed to start or expand CCL?
Awareness to the greater community as we approach businesses, agencies, etc.
Opportunities to meet and collaborate with employers regarding internships and jobs
Informational meetings
Networking opportunities
Keeping the students informed of alternative learning and experience  
Expand knowledge of business partners willing to take our students for informational interviews, job shadows, internships
Business connection and involvement
Sponsorships
Ideas for additional outreach and events
Outreach
Contacts- who do we talk to get info
Whatís needed so I can help fill the need
Sample jobs so they know what they want to do before they go to college
Increased employer participation and willingness to host interns/shadows
Continued collaboration with secondary and post-secondary education
Youth apprenticeship
Communication and collaboration with partner agencies
Expose those in poverty to more opportunities
Opportunities- employers businesses and schools to allow me to come educate/share knowledge experiences with students/staff
We need contacts and opportunity to understand how we can support career connected learning with our local businesses and industries.
We are in a position to assist our community in expanding career connected learning opportunities.
More partnerships to allow for jobs, shadows, internships and apprenticeships
Communication between our agency and those who promote CCL so that we can provide opportunities to youth
Establish communication and partnerships with schools and skills centers to find what interest the students and guide them towards a career path
Interns that can work for at least a year. Short term interns are not for our line of work due to the amount of training we can offer.
We need secondary schools to develop the career paths that streamline transfer credits and entry of skilled workers.
More information. I have been in Wenatchee for 2 Ω years and had no idea about CCL until recently
Connecting with rural (Quincy, Moses Lake, Cashmere)
More communication and coordination between ALL players


 
5.	What are the 3 actions you can take to implement or support CCL in your community?
Aberdeen ñ three action steps toward CCL
Expand Uplift (career preparation training program) to k-12 by partnering with CTE teachers.
Expand internship opportunities early- summer opportunities that can be credit for high school graduation.
Partner with communities to educate parents and mentors on these CCL opportunities.
Partnering more with local schools to find ways to bridge gaps that exist.
Find ways to support job shadows and externships.
Support volunteer opportunities to get staff engaged in the local school community.
Find out more on how Ocean Shores can actually utilize apprenticeship programs.
Find money to put local programs in place for itsí adult students.
Educate employers about programs available that can help them attract more employees.
Apprenticeship programs.
Internships with local schools.

Auburn ñ three action steps toward CCL
1.	Interview stakeholders about CCL to assess barriers/challenges and their visions for CCL in their communities ? do blog stories, podcasts to determine legislative agenda in support of CCL
2.	Build support of communities to take action in support of CCL, based on their input on what they identified as important.
1.	Integration in K-8 (technology, hands on building, leaders)
2.	Partner with small and diverse business to provide information, education and opportunities around CCL
3.	Provide certifications at the HS level, provide professional education and trainers for parents.
Volunteer to mentor.
Teach mentorship, teaching skills to employers, leads that teach folks the job.
1.	Offer to have students sit in company planning meetings.
2.	In classroom discussions with students about trades.
3.	Field trip to construction sites.
Community trade fair to educate on opportunities. 
City government/councils pass legislation to adhere to RCW regarding apprenticeship utilization
Offer tours of construction training facilities.
Create an even stronger advisory group to help direct our CTE/educational programs
Increase job shadow and internship opportunities
Help direct state and area level discussions and outcomes.
I will continue to advocate inclusion and diversity in policy development, decisions and actualization.
Study gaps in the manelt. 
Work with employers
Create/develop training programs to fill gaps
I am happy to be an advocate for career connected learning and sharing the story of my program and ìlessons learnedî to both our local employers and with other teachers interested in CCL.
I would like to connect with policy makers and elected officials to find opportunities to make career connected learning a sustainable initiative.
I would like to help promote CCL to companies, employers, industry to help identify opportunities for win-win collaborations.
Share policy frameworks with CTE teachers 
Build externship opportunities for teachers 
Share policy frameworks with CTE advisory administrators in district.
Build more work based learning opportunities for students.
Continue working with youth, employers and partners to building skills, soft skills, understanding partnerships, training at no cost.
Exposing students to the opportunities out there.
Sharing info inside the classroom from real world jobs on all levels, not just gearing kids toward top level, need sustainable workforce with people at all levels.
2 way street businesses to school/student vice versa.
Commit to my duties and try 
Also service, never again let anyone stop me again be a good
1.	Finish vital effort ñ database on existing online/hybrid courses
2.	Connect back with educators and businesses to review and assess gaps and redundancies.
3.	Design and explore a format for citizens and businesses and educator roundtables to support/guide community contributors
4.	Get/make a vision for the auburn students

Bellingham/Skagit ñ three action steps toward CCL
Continue and increase scholarship. Do more education at lower levels of school. Ask my industry peers to do more to support these efforts to develop our future talent.
Paid summer internships, educating our community about local jobs/economic conditions. Celebrating/sharing success examples.
Educate/present.
Challenge our local high schools to a video challenge or high lighting the actual jobs available. What do these jobs look like?
Build a more robust advisory committee with more active members.
Coordinate between schools and industry
Make student work public
Coordinated regional meeting with key stakeholders: economic development, workforce board, k-12, university, CR
Improve contact/communications between HS initiatives and college initiatives
Develop partnerships approach industry leaders recruit STEM workforce volunteers
Yes ~ Skagit, San Juan, Whatcom and Skagit 4-H youth development is interested in being involved in ìpathways.î
Outreach, embrace more educational institutions, increased communication.
Build programs of study, k-14
1.	Be the feed of the information from the schools to the employers and vice versa
2.	Have information/connections on our website to get members informed and involved.
3.	Help employers understand how to get and utilize interns.
Recruit local biz to go to schools to discuss all of the jobs in their industry.
Build partnerships with community and schools.
1.	Build/use career awareness oriented curriculum.
2.	Connect chamber with Tech Prep consortium/or just MHS
3.	Communicate specific needs to community
4.	Business connect to our different programs (start with CTE).
Get involved with WA STEM, Trade Association ñ TAG across to employers, connect with Junior Achievement to this
Comprehensive CCL meeting, business need and all providers everyone at the table. Show up for work.
1)	Encourage more youth to participate in internships
2)	Coordinate partnerships and a plan.
Continue with employer advisory board develop partnerships throughout university
1)	Restructure our career center at MVHS to better meet our students needs.
2)	CTE valued partner = CCL
3)	CTE advisory boards and WCAL
Connect with chamber of commerce to bring in panelist to discuss business opportunities in the community 
Workplace tours
Create PD for staff to help build communications between business/industry and educators on workplace skills and expectations.
Informing people about services and goodwill etc ñ workforce
Helping job seekers see themselves in this position ñ the future
Teaching more soft skills classes at work source (teaching directly)
Reaching out to employers to assess their needs (gaps)
Work with colleges to partner/create a CNA cohorts
Pre-app with construction and build pipeline to class.
1)	Chambers should provide co-working spaces -young entrepreneurs and students could earn their rent by staffing those facilities ? this could also be a talent pipeline
2)	Sponsor youth business plan competitions
3)	Create an app thatís a guide to STEM business in the bounty (we have scheduled a meeting with Bellingham chamber about that)- perhaps a shovel ready grant project?
Meet with our Whatcom chamber, work with Tim to develop STEM-C app, develop BEST committee
1)	Promote CCL programs as ìlegitimateî education- dispel the idea of ìalternativeî schooling.
2)	Partner with local agencies/institutions that are developing CCL
3)	Follow legislation that supports CCL and re-elect those law makers that believe in CCL
Advocate and find funding to support a coordinator to connect industry with students for work-based learning experiences.
Promote and find more funding to support and connect faculty to experience industry based learning experiences to increase their knowledge
Promote to regional industry the value to CCL through service on industry boards and in my role in workforce with advisory committees etc.
Stronger connections between high school and industry ñ career exploration.

Bremerton ñ three action steps toward CCL
More networking with community partners
Career fairs
Boys and Girls clubs can continue to partner with school districts to support efforts. Mentoring and graduation efforts.
Support local schools by participation.
Support Public/private partnerships for mutual benefit.
Learn more about CCL initiatives.
Find connection to my organizations plan.
Inform others of CCL.
Continue working with Olympic College (workforce development)
Continue working with Olympic workforce development council and industry partners
Provide education on CCL to social media followers 

Cathlamet ñ three action steps toward CCL
Inclement in educational advisory committees ñ get teachers and administrators into community event clearing house
Share the message.
Share any marketable materials.
Participate in any future collective and facilitated gatherings/meetings.
Get involved in advisory.
Volunteer.
Industry/ real world experience
DOS/HSB plan
Explore funding, recruit for involvement, speakers, interns, job shadows
Elective credit offerings.
1.	Create a CCL district committee
2.	Research CCL programs/ideas mentioned today
3.	Identify and contact local stakeholders
Speak with retirees to mentor youth and to speak with employers.
Message that these private/public partnerships are ìfairî in terms of commitment and input (financially)
Join advisory committees
Assist
Finding employers willing to support CCL, her in Wahki counting involving high school kids in CCL (education). Cooperation between agencies and advisory boards.
Publicize the CCL that is already going on in the area to build on. Work more with business to explain the advantage to them working on developing a work resource. Find funding when needed.
Get involved in communities, partnerships.
Participate in advisory committees. Education not in just building teachers and administration.
Partnerships.
Getting businesses involved.
Utilize resources. Would love a listserve of folks here. Go on and read cruletzbec.org 
Be an advocate for those promoting their programs but promoting resources that are complimentary to what we do. Network capabilities so everyone is in the know.
Offer my training skills in leadership development. Create a senior/retiree group routinely available to studnts for career exposure; work at the community center.
1.	Hold a series of industry-specific presentations for students conducting industry experts.
2.	Develop a teacher industry group with in the district to expose educators and guidance counselors to the various industry opportunities available to entry- level employees
3.	Move to establish a technical ìrunning startî program for internship, apprentice and other certificated programs. (ie high school credit for getting a realtor license)
Create more community discussion summit.
More PR of our CTE programs.
Create more opportunities for students to attend CCL event.
Find out if we can get involved with shadowing or internship at the port.
Involve school administrators and CTE personnel to ìbuy intoî involving businesses in the schools in education process. Enlist retired people to give to the community to help develop relationships between employable youth and business. Recruit skilled community members to help in the education process. CTE, environmental sciences.
Assist in coordination of local programs and events. Provide info and presentations on the importance of CCL. Support and host events for partners.
Remain in the conversation. 
Help my team stay connected to this work.
Look at curriculum related to CCK in our schools- all of us with core messages.
1)	We need to have a summit with businesses and educators in our community to make sure we are developing programs in school and through work-based learning to meet the specific needs of employers in our regions/communities.
2)	Participation on an advisory with college of high school.
3)	Increasing collaboration/partnerships between business, industry with educators.

Colville ñ three action steps toward CCL
1.	Work study/ride along opportunities at our shop; 
2.	Partner with teachers to provide trade specific education opportunities
3.	Encourage kids to press on! That math is not just for a grade ñ but rather a good paying job. We eagerly await their arrival.
Get involved with local efforts
1.	Make sure 4-H leaders and members understand 4-H is CCL
2.	Explore new 4-H projects that directly relate to hard job skills
1.	Help connect needs with jobs
2.	Help publicize
3.	Help train and teach
4.	Be involved!
1.	Provide services to businesses
2.	Educate businesses on programs
3.	Join boards
1.	A mentorship program
2.	An apprenticeship program
3.	Guided tours of business operations
Round table meetings
Workforce development roundtable or similar group that meets quarterly
ï	Open mentorship in health care
ï	Rural areas have opportunities and some barriers ñ we NEED broadband!
1.	Be available to assist schools
2.	Provide training to schools 

Davenport ñ three action steps toward CCL
Office time
Resources
Partnership
Incentives for employers to open their doors to students.
Toolkit to start a program.
Map assets
Monthly meetings.
Communications.
List of businesses.
List of services in the County.
Continue implementation of satellite skills center program in Davenport.
Be more active in chamber activities.
Be an advocate for any community.

Everett ñ three action steps toward CCL
Continue engaging in the conversation
Explore consortium funding for apprenticeship/mentoring coordinator
I need to get out in the community.
I need to get out into the schools.
I need to get the students out into the community.
Talking with coworkers to find people who are willing to be mentors to inspire students.
Push the envelope on being able to offer internships for high school students
Add forms/ quick bios of PUD careers to our classroom lessons and camps
I am constantly looking for ways to introduce or support policies that expand CCL opportunities. Also looking for models where HS students get paid and receive credits.
Remove stigma of non-college pathways, recognize the brilliance required of many CTE jobs and the excellent earning potential. Kids shouldnít fee ìless thanî if they donít go to college
Recruit more community mentors in schools
Strengthen high school and beyond plan with more mentors, encourage more teachers to access them so that they understand the pathway of each student
Continue to work with our non-profit network for trainee pipeline
Continue to work with our employer network for post-grad employment
Building our relationships with the schools to increase awareness of alternative training pathways and how they can be involved in their local community.
Better coordination and visioning with career centers
Connect local resources (partners) to program needs
Continue to work with CTE advisory industry partners
Workbased learning (WBL)
As an elected official I can help implement CCL by doing away with the 24 credit requirements, allow CTE credits to apply to college readiness requirements, give local school districts flexibility
Implement more work based learning that is meaningful
Bringing the discussion to the workforce development people
Getting credit for graduation for internship programs and having them accepted by universities here in Washington
Advocating for continued grow of the STEM platform (CTE, internships, externships)
More outreach
Change expectations/language around CTE
The army is postured to provide career awareness, exploration and preparation.
Get the word out. Help determine resource needs. Look into other parts of the country and see what works.
Work on providing the supports to college and career support staff in the district such as financial resources as well as structural.
Reach out to businesses to create partnerships
Create time for students to learn about those opportunities.
Advocate and recruit business to engage with schools. 
Personally speak with students to expand their view of options.
Work with legislators to understand importance over time.
Provide tours and internships where applicable
Participate in advisory capacity
Advocate for CCL
Support CCL discussions/connections within network
Connecting with Everett SD at CCL summit
Ensuring quality externship
Research current CCL programs at the local, regional, national, and global level to see whatís working well, whatís not working, etc.
Partnership/network with various school districts throughout Snohomish county to see what is currently being used to connect youth to career related opportunities.
Enroll myself in more training like todayís Governorís summit to be more aware of what is going on!
Make a personal commitment to be engaged
Be one part of the STEM program in one of the local elementary, middle, or high schools
Promote the concept of CCL with your local city, state and national representatives
Offer to present information on how army reserve training can be a great option for those with desire for learning a skill they can apply immediately, both in the civilian sector and their reserve component role on weekends. How the two can complement each other. Local communities can retain quality manpower, with training, in the area.
1.	Pursue accredited training programs at HopeWorks 
2.	Continue to pursue partnerships with local high schools to get students in low-income populations into our programs.
3.	Pipelines created and sustained with employers to connect our interns with when they graduate.
Provide curriculums and workshops in identifying individual strengths of elementary, middle and high school students. This is the key element in ìself-awarenessî which is the foundation for good career decision making.
1.	Bring back information to team from today.
2.	Support school districts
3.	Provide good connections, examples if requested.
Advocate for policies and funding for CCL in Olympia and here in Snohomish County locally
Develop programs focused on CCL and give opportunities to these in high school and looking to start a second or third career.
Connect with employers to better understand the needs of their future workforce
Push CTE
We are doing a lot!! Making headway with big dream and vision! Create curriculum, focus on out of subject teachers 1) Donít give up  ìcommitî 2) Modify curricula with teacher/student/industry input 3) On board industry through our passion and sense of purpose.
Increase industry partners to connect with education educate academics on the importance of industry partnership validity. 
Task force at the high school level. Launch campaign ìgoî. Challenge through student highlights and progress. Think of barriers, liability and suspension. Change language from ìmiddleî skills to tech, etc. Specialists in CCL.
Leverage connections/ relationships with local leadership, chamber of commerce.
Communicate our ìmessageî to our business/industry/community folks. How do we do that successfully?
Change vernacular of anything that has a ìnegativeî connotation for our efforts (middle skills to less than) This is an issue to focus on, electricianís skills are for from less than!
Teach 21 century skills in my classroom. Change the terminology from middle level skills to licensed skills. Invite students to participate in the conversation.
Encourage our 4-H leaders to invite speakers from business, do tours.
Recruit volunteers from business.
Stay informed/involved in CCL efforts in the community.
Identity, flag apprenticeship programs. Check with counselors and their knowledge. Work with skills centers to share pathway.
Identify apprenticeships and connect to schools.
Talk to parents.
Work with businesses to find connections.
Apprenticeship programs, trade and identify them, create access for students.
Connect with community libraries to identify youth programs that could be connected to local businesses.
Host events to promote the benefits of STEM middle skills to parents and families.
Talk to local businesses about youth internship and apprenticeship options.
Train youth SVSS staff to work on integrating business skills in their programming.
We continue to work with local businesses and industry to increase awareness both in and out of school setting. This is bigger than just placing students. This is also about bringing businesses into the schools and educating teachers, counselors and administration.
Continue employer round tables each month and ask employers to become more engaged in the k-12 mentoring and internships and solutions.
Tours of facilities
1.	Continue leading civic narrative design work group with EVCW, UW Bothell and industry partners.
2.	Get UW Bothell administrative leadership to the policy table.
3.	Pilot some CCL models with k-12 and higher education, pipeline partnership.
1.	Set-up video chats with employers and apprenticeship for students
2.	Help student find mentors to support their career pathway
3.	Support them with what they need.
Formal partnerships with local businesses/industry. Focus on youth driven paths and interests and find opportunities to meet their own goals and foster growth. Create opportunities for youth to see and experience a wide range of career options. Educate community business leaders on issues, teens face and deal with ñ biologically, neurologically, socially etc to bridge gaps and foster understanding.
Serve on an advisory, reach out to community members to bring them into the classroom and continue to incorporate STEM skills into my curriculum.

Lakewood ñ three action steps toward CCL
-	Be vocal in supporting and valuing STEM, technical, and other CTE related careers.
-	Talk with industries about the needs for supporting people once they are employed/keeping them valuable/making careers not just jobs.
Work with WFD to places in which recruitment could happen. Destigmatize what the workforce can look like if the ë4 yearí track isnít taken.
1)	Improve connection to schools, employers, and students.
2)	Continue assisting connection of CCL to Liberal Arts and Science education. 
1)	Work to establish solid apprenticeship programs.
2)	Educate community employers and parents.
3)	Find ways to continue to find ways to engage with community.
1)	Bring this back to my institution.
2)	Share with community partners.
3)	Bring literature/data into conversations about CCL.
1)	Share the framework with my special education colleagues at OSPI.
2)	Connect with CCTS around information and available resources.
3)	Brainstorm takeaways from today with other WSRC members.
Promote work-based learning in my programs. Partner with local employers to increase WBL opportunities.
1)	Continue to support our teachersí efforts to meet with advisory members.
2)	Host an annual event connecting business and industry professionals and teachers and students.
3)	Find ways to get business professionals into classrooms to help advise students and teachers.
1)	Make more connections with local high schools.
2)	Update programs at the college to ensure there are clean pathways for students.
3)	Increased marketing about the technical education.
1)	Attend all relevant webinars and workshops.
2)	Attend or become a part of committees and grass root organizations.
3)	Apply for positions that would advance our goals.
1)	Look for industry partners for our students.
2)	Learn more about how to step up the electronic pathway in our school system.
3)	Is there more funding available for my school?
Educate and inform other on what CCL is how it works and how we can incorporate it into our schools, business community, and local communities. 
1)	Build out the cyber security rapid employment academic (apprenticeship) training employment system (creates)
2)	Make it a priority at all levels of society.
3)	Recommend doing an appreciative inquiry whole system design initiative.

Lyle ñ three action steps toward CCL
ï	Support CCL by being a positive voice for change
ï	Act as information resource if asked (I learn career classes in high schools and a local college) Schools should be using work source staff more
ï	Work with our Americorps staff to get into schools to talk about career exploration resources, earnings and labor market information.
ï	Having  HR meet with our students and teachers.
ï	Having teachers do a tour of local businesses so they know whatís the demand and make connections
I can arrange to have students when the CCL programs are available.
ï	Involve teachers to tour facilities
ï	As resources allow, continue to expand the number of tours and interns
ï	Share this message with leadership and community
ï	Form a coalition or committee to develop a plan
ï	Plan of action
ï	Put plan into action (Communication. How will this be funded?)
Work with the school.
ï	Improve two way communications on CCL
ï	Take advantage of connections with existing groups making a difference
ï	Develop a clear consistent message that is a shared vision of success
ï	Expand existing bi-state communication networks
ï	We can connect people across the region through existing resources (Columbia Gorge Community College
ï	Person centered planning ñ Iím trained!
ï	Communicate with the disabled community
ï	Communication ñ start group, improve publicity
ï	Internship matching system
ï	Work with schools to get info down to kids effectively (e.g. is career counselor working with all?)
ï	Provide template/model programs to be shared among participants and businesses
Infrastructure
ï	Transportation
ï	Broadband
ï	Housing
As an employment office we can provide assessments, resume, interviewing, and other employment ready workshops. We can assist employers with recruitment, hiring events, online job search/posting system.
Support efforts at the library.
ï	Contact and network with school leadership and instructors
ï	Offer introduction/orientation/apprenticeship of employer to schools
ï	Develop our tours of the facility. Internship to diversified population
ï	Advertise over the radio, newspaper, social media
ï	Outreach to businesses
ï	Funding and resources
ï	Collect more detailed info on what tech business needs for training
ï	Connect teachers to tech business
ï	Find mentors for robotics teams
ï	Match students found at job fairs with the right departments
ï	Work with elected officials and department heads to develop apprenticeships with measurable goals and achievements.
ï	Meet with local school counselors and teachers to find out what ER/CTY can do to help
ï	Help communities with career days and job fairs
ï	Help arrange and find funding for new hire and information about workforce training
ï	Community organizations can help match adult mentors with CCL
ï	Can increase awareness and continue discussion.
ï	Can have businesses and schools by the chamber of commerce or similar organizations
ï	Guidance counselors will need to be stakeholders
ï	High school job fair
ï	List and advertise jobs available with schools
ï	Connect business owners with schools
ï	Support through social media
ï	Internship matching system
ï	Better understanding of school structure

Moses Lake ñ three action steps toward CCL
-	Keep looking for partners that want student interns.
-	We need to come up with a different graduation requirement path.
-	Teach students about longevity with an employer.
1.	Press for change in our CTE department
2.	Communicate with those who create employment/opportunity for youth.
3.	Develop opportunity for youth in my own business.
Educate both in and out of schools; set up situations that expose both sides to each other; help determine how to teach and foster stronger work ethic in our kids.
Chamber of Commerce could help connect industry to the classroom to expose opportunities that are right here locally.
1.	Communication and advertising the CCL process for our community
2.	Initiate meetings and grass roots discussion and inter-action to promote and be the avenue for CCL to be responsible.
3.	Set up short/long term goals for CCL at GCDSD. How to bring the individual/student, public/private business together into a working partnership.
ï	Strengthen awareness to industry companies, educators and youth.
ï	Continue to provide/enforce career prep workshops from basic soft/hard skills.
Encourage ìactionsî on opportunities for 3 or 4 above.
ReCCL out to local industry and work with schools and leadership team to encourage progress toward producing students who are aware of opportunities and prepare to be successful in their next steps after high school.
1.	Speak with industry
2.	Speak with schools
3.	Speak with social service agencies
Education staff about CCL and how their curriculum and standard can be met and strengthened through CCL.
1.	Adapt more apprentice and internships. Career days in junior and high schools (with testimonials from young employees). 
2.	A day that teachers go job shadow. They need to know more about workforce and jobs. 
3.	Change school policies to let industry spokesperson in to talk to kids. Getting people on the same page and working as a team is not easy.
1.	Let people know what we offer.
2.	Partner up with local schools to educate students on opportunities available through us.
3.	Provide clients with CCL. Make this a priority.
Need someone to coordinate within staff.
1)	Start visiting local industry and asking them what they would like us to provide for them. Focus on aligning our students with WBL sites.
2)	Realize that students coming to us, they have no idea how to push a broom.
1)	Expand work site learning.
2)	Modify high school graduation requirements.
3)	Expand CTE staff.
Training/presentations, collaboration with community, awareness and spreading the word.
Reach out to employers to learn the nature of skills need for specific jobs, so we can ensure our programs are relevant. Work more seamlessly with K-12 to provide a continuous approach to career pathways. Begin in early grades provide guided pathways, and help children learn more about and prepare for a career.

Okanogan ñ three action steps toward CCL
1)	Train and frame partnerships
2)	Participate in strategic planning
3)	Support any process to develop K-12 pipelines
1)	Continue to develop partnerships
2)	Collaborate with neighboring districts
1)	Explore existing school career programs
2)	Clarify schools commitment
3)	Set specific short term goals
Attend meetings do career guidance counseling for the youth.
Connect, engage, and motivate.
1)	Closer cooperation with and ramps to CTE programs
2)	Promote community awareness
3)	Investigate CCL certifications for high school 21 and up instructors across the district
1)	Coordinate this program with DSHS CSD efforts to transform case management to enable our clients to become self-sufficient and end poverty.
2)	Find out how the Central Washington workforce development based council can work with us ñ Okanogan to increase opportunities here.

Port Angeles ñ three action steps toward CCL
From worksource we are currently working with local high schools on job preparation continue building this relationship with local schools
Willing to continue to work on a task force creating pathways
Colleges with local school districts
WSSDA the largest elected body in the state actively engages the legislators in Olympia and in Washington DC they need to have a seat at the table
Continue involvement in community task forces and program development.
Spending time speaking to youth about local opportunities in the healthcare fields
Possibly offer training with my employees to get people in the community trained for jobs in demand
Connecting with tech schools that have externships (PIMA for example) to help train their students
College share facilities with high school to train early education to get hands on idea of future goals for students
Reach out to colleges for externs
Reach out to grade schools to educate children about veterinary medicine
Align with teachers to educate about veterinary careers
Keep the LEKT part of the discussion ñ communicate cultural needs
Partnership with Peninsula College and other educational programs
Help community members be aware of all resources and all possible job markets/fields
Look for opportunities to communicate opportunities and strategies for success
Be more involved to learn as this initiates
See where I can connect with my work as a coach
Make contacts to support education of youth

Pullman ñ three action steps toward CCL
Articulation agreements between community colleges and state university/colleges.
-	Connect with our schools about this initiative.
-	Partners with other rural schools to help improve the economy of scale for connectedness with private companies and other resources.
-	Continue the conversation and make sure it is followed by action.
Work with area labs to explore opportunities for locally developed R&D and manufacturing.
Determine the foals and outcomes. Collaborate with university partners. Plan around a pipeline/pathway.

Raymond ñ three action steps toward CCL
Income evolutions to cover workforce development. Partner with community mentors to offer workforce-training opportunities.
Continue to work with school. CTE board and make the effort a top priority.
Develop an effective internship pipeline, talent pipeline and work-based learning opportunities in schools.
SOE above.
1)	Help connect people/organizations.
2)	Support with volunteers.
3)	Part of set up.
1)	Talk to other partners to develop better employment development programs.
2)	Better advertise resources available locally.
3)	Recruit teen volunteers to help support skill development.
1)	Be part of the discussion.
2)	Explore resources/funding available.
-	Showcase local success stories.
-	Scholarship for Pacific County Students going into tourism/hospitality.

Republic ñ three action steps toward CCL
-	Get other programs involved with the school (jail, rehab, counseling) 
-	Get high school involved to educate students in career options.
Help with planning, and promoting.
Keep the conversation going, 10 year plan, and donate my time.
1)	Introduce kids to the various trades within a hospital/clinic.
2)	Mentor kids (resources, drugs ect.)

Richland ñ three action steps toward CCL
1)	Continue talks with Govís office to make increasing number of females pursing and persisting in STEM careers an initiative.
2)	Continue talks with WA STEM on how to track girl serving STEM programs and existing mentor/mentee relationships in WA
3)	Support existing effort of such a mentoring program at WSU-TC in order to expand to all of WA. Contact Dr. Jillian Cadwell ñ jillian.cadwell@tricity.wsu.edu
Add career element to our existing MESA outreach (middle, high school and community college).
1.	Develop an Industry Advisory Board for our STEAM middle school
2.	Bring teachers and industry professionals together to collaborate on project-based learning. 
We are and have been implementing this state wide by promoting Apprenticeship Utilization on public works projects. Itís up to the communities, counties, and state to adopt this and to enforce it.
Be involved in the model for WBL (I assure you this is more than 3)
Apprenticeship event.
Accredited apprentices on all public works projects. Give pre-apprentices the opportunities to participate in these local projects. Make skilled trade credentials a valuable resource for credit in higher education. Folks with hands on experience make the best engineers, detailers and project managers. We can help identify current road blocks and develop this mission statement.
1)	Learn more about CCL framework
2)	Share about CCL with others
3)	Think about how our existing initiatives can support CCL efforts.
MSA career connect 2017, increase awareness to our community and schools.
Open house for career tech programs ñ see what it really looks like in a surgical technology class or a welding class. Camps to get students interested in STEM- have business participate. 
Create forum to begin communicating and breaking down silos (educators, employers, agencies, etc.)
Seek opportunities to learn more about what is going on in the community in CCL, create a list of things we can create to fill gaps. 

Ritzville ñ three action steps toward CCL
1.	Mentorship
2.	Internship
3.	Apprentices
I would need to see a lot more details on apprenticeship. I donít see paying a kid to learn a job at the outrageous minimum wages a s a business owner. ìApprenticeshipî is learning alongside not getting paid to learn basics! Kids need entry level jobs to start learning ìhowî to work but we can no longer afford to hire them!! We need to let the free market work and get the government regulations out of it.
Local conferences in the community
Work together to present into school


Shelton ñ three action steps toward CCL
Week long camp to develop. Kiwanis club provides access to the camp, and will provide scholarships to students covering most of the costs of the camp.
Do we need a new market learning? Do we have a career expo? We do have an expo/career fair but still this is primarily focused on the 
Using websites as brochures for identifying jobs that kids like or might want to have 
Teachers need to have clock hours, we can launch  a training program to get business and teachers connected and trained and developing a larger program.
Bring people in to have the discussion ongoing to develop.
Learning the health science -  developing learning clubs
Pathways to Prosperity?
Chief Moody - Afterschool Program -  started to get kids off the streets, music teacher, art teacher, comedian, and put on spaghetti feed, would love to see the YMCA.
We can build something up that integrate the kids as tutors, and we just starting to roll taking in about 15 kids a day and they are landing out at school.
Program is at Choice, because the centrally located areas, access to the transit work.
Mason County is looking at identifying gaps and filling those gaps in transportation access with the special focus on the kids/riders who need to get from a to b.
Items need to be able to have these transit options up front and center. 
The Port and WSU should partner up and provide something for both north and south mason.
Need to build these common terms to be raised in the soft-skill
We need skills, creativity, collaboration
SpI will give welding skills - OCC welding program to bring people in. There does not appear to be that big of a concern regarding risk, litigationÖ.

Spokane ñ three action steps toward CCL
1)	Partner with teacher education programs (ex. EWU program, CCS programs) to plant this concept early on when individuals are being trained to teach.
2)	Parent education about post secondary options, careers, and labor market into.
3)	Increased exposure and usage of the access 2 experience tool (Tyler Lafferly)
4)	Teacher externship program.
Be on and invite others to be a part of advisory committees with technical learning programs.
Support a speaker board for teachers to access for references.
Create higher-level advisor and community career fair.
-	Counselor awareness of opportunities for students.
-	Increase awareness of whatís happening in the schools. Invite to join general advisory committees or other groups that provide feedback and support.
-	Businessperson mentorship of teachers.
-	Use account 2 (a2e.com) type systemic endeavor.
-	Project-based learning expansion and training for teachers. 
-	Promote the CTE efforts that are working and are sustainable.
-	Engage private sector involvement and influence on this conversation.
Continue CTE course development. I feel like the CCL is just rebranding CTE when CTE programs, in general have progressed amazingly. CTE funding continues to decrease. CCL is CTE.
-	Define your terms
-	Change terminology = not ìmiddle skilledî
-	Visualization of post-secondary pathways from high school = certification technical degrees, AA/AAS, BA/BS, ect.
-	Local graduates returning to the school.
-	Opportunities for teachers to get into the businesses summer interns ñ teachers.
Continue to develop a ìspeakersî list for schools/clubs to use. (Access to experience expansion)
-	Professionals/tradesmen can mentor teachers and students.
-	Formalize a higher-level advisory group
-	Counselors teachers need more meaningful (paid) externship.
I donít like the ìmiddle skillî term. No student should feel like theyíre second best if theyíve interested in careers other than college-track/white collar.
1)	Environmental scan/resource assessment
2)	Community Colleges offering applied BAís
3)	Create relevancy in school through private partnership
1)	Send this info to district admin
2)	Advisory committees
3)	Continue with what weíve been doing for 20+ years.
In my role, encourage and support youth participation in educational offerings.
-	Participate in the efforts to form coalitions
-	Work closely with SWDC
-	Keep career services staffed adequately

Tenino ñ three action steps toward CCL
-Network with local employers to assess interest
-Assess L&I program for forestry and Ag businesses in Thurston
-Explore funding for pilot H.S. CTE/FFA to local farm support work
Partner with more school districts and implement leadership development
Educate, advocate, and implement. 
Apply some resources to the process by the way of offering current employers up to go work in the classroom for lessons or tours.
-How do we build this support and resource? Happy to help bring it to life.
-Outreach to labor/community partners and to share established best practices with apprenticeship/worker centers/ect.
Host more events for exposure to jobs and preparation.
STEM fairs ñ outreach events
-Host career fairs
-Connect with more organizations to talk about career resources
-STEM fairs
-Be at the table with school discussions on this topic ñ donít put resources just into public schools ñ libraries are also in rural communities and are open when schools are not ñ year round services.
Define goals and outcomes
Develop partnerships between education, employers, and CBOs. Early exposure to careers.
Volunteer Construction Career Day.
Partnership
Build local CTE advisory committees, connect with local industries and employers, give students multiple opportunities to explore and connect with job/career opportunities.
1)	Bring Issue to Thurston Regional Planning Council
2)	Talk to State/Fed Legislator 
3)	Follow up with all the smart people in this room
1)	Engage businesses in conversations about hiring young adults and youth.
2)	Share with students and communicate opportunities
1)	Support rural and tribal library efforts with STEAM materials
2)	Provide and facilitate federal grant opportunities
3)	Train librarians in STEAM related topics
1)	Businesses identify their goals/opportunities for schools
2)	Schools identify career oriented programs for business
3)	Cross-wall it these to identify immediate opportunities
4)	Explore long-term programs to close gap on non-immediate opportunities
Send CTE director out.
1)	Provide expertise to the program from our employees.
2)	Create internship opportunities.
3)	Provide mentorship volunteers

Union Gap ñ three action steps toward CCL
-Engage out graduate students in mentorship programs that promote STEM education excellence.
-Promote a diversity management program within the college to up recruitment of faculty students that are better-matched ethnically/linguistically to the communities they will serve.
Make CCL more aware spread word about it in school clubs and get teens involved.
I will contact local high schools to offer information about our local workforce and needs. Provide myself as a resource and extend my professional contacts to provide leadership or advice to youth. Be a mentor myself to youth in the community or volunteer with organizations that help or benefit youth.
-Invite someone else to attend
-Educate and advocate
-Develop a pipeline to something tangible
-Encourage youth I work with and teach them the skills to find job shadow opportunities, informational interviews, etc.
-Expand internship placement opportunities for youth
-Collaborate with other existing programs to get the youth I work with involved with other programs that fit

Vancouver ñ three action steps toward CCL
-Regional approach to events ñ K-12 events calendar.
-Expand STEM Network membership
-Message to other stakeholders i.e. parents, counselors, etc.
Connecting business to students.
-Work with students to support and educate ñ not enable.
-Educate parents
-Be involved
-Partner with local groups
-Provide apprenticeships
-Get more involved with local community
-To connect with other who can further your own organizationís mission and goals or vice versa. Create such opportunities for networking.
-Look at internal opportunities to create CCL at our organization.
-Host workshop, programs for other organizations that have CCL opportunities at the libraries.
Continue to provide tours of our facility and show youth about what jobs and careers are available in trade work.
-Talk to students about real world working.
-Advisory board
-Encourage talk about tech trends
-Post opportunities on the online job board ìPenguin Jobsî use format to connect students and employers.
-Seek information on employers willing to conduct informational interviews or job shadow, connecting students with that learning.
-Employer speaker panels at Clark.
Establish City of Vancouver internships for high school students.
-Serving on numerous boards and committees to support/expand CCL opportunities and strengthen business engagement. CREDC strategic plan ñ implementation goals/strategies being developed will specifically address action items CREDC can take to support these efforts.
-Work plan for CCL efforts developed by subcommittee of SW STEM Network if/when funding is available.
Walla Walla ñ three action steps toward CCL
Some collective actions:
Create a centralized system linking the region: Get back together, target of what we want to accomplish, assign various work groups
Expand the Try a Trade program for students and teachers
Create a framework/structure for job shadowing/apprenticeship opportunities; businesses would be open to helping if it came to them as a fully formed idea
Set up a Google Group or similar linkage to continue todayís conversations; ask Summit participants to continue to invite others to participate in this effort
Some individual actions:
Incorporate into our (county government) 2018 budget ten 10-week internship
Revive the Reality Fair (financial literacy)
New updates and expanded audiences (including teachers) for Try a Trade events
Community council continue to support efforts to conduct regional inventory (they donít perform the work but will work in the community to see how/by whom/with what funds such an effort could be initiated
Sustain grant funded fellows @ Whitman 

Wenatchee ñ three action steps toward CCL
Provide the outreach/awareness to NCW area
Invite employers to discuss area apprenticeships for students and veterans
Create job boards for posting within the veteranís lounge at WVC
Change youth employment laws
Network with partners
Offer career services to partners 
Connect with leadership team in the valley
Outreach to business community
Acknowledgement of partnerships and show appreciation 
Get people connected
Find resources for people
Find people to fill jobs
Continue collaboration with education and business
Apply for a variety of funding opportunities
Share work based learning best practices
Lead efforts to grow/create apprenticeship opportunities
Stay connected and partner in this effort
Offer my knowledge and skills wherever they may be needed
Educate those I know about this effort 
Offer myself as a resource (mock interviews, job shadow, mentor, educate)
I can speak out when appropriate for CCL 
Invite us to the table for conversations about how we can support local workforce needs
Inform our teachers and students on opportunities available and get them entry level experience
Assist in promoting business and industry participation in CCL awareness, and potential partnerships that meet the needs of the business partners and students. 
Continued partnerships with WVC and local businesses
Improve communication of CCL opportunities to parents and students and the community
Start youth apprenticeship opportunities 
Expose students to other possibilities other than college
Communicate needs to CCL promoters and vice versa 
Federal agencies can rarely hire so they should use interns to their advantage.
Need for an event for students to get them in to work after school
Help facilitate career path models to begin in 10th or 11th grade
Networkingóreach out to business to see if I can help in any way
Become more educated on the programs that are available and get more involved. 
Meeting with Dennis Conger
Connect and integrate with what I am doing as a transition specialist 
Explore and bring others together in smaller districts
Work with our school district to encourage participation in the programs (ESD role?)
Make it easier for employers to provide the opportunities (donít overlook small business)
Make it easier for the schools to provide opportunities (exposure!)

